COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: CS(COMM) 801/2023 & I.A. 1741/2024, I.A. 31225/2024, I.A. 31226/2024, I.A. 1880/2025
DATE: 15.07.2025
PLAINTIFF: JOHNSON & JOHNSON PTE. LTD.
DEFENDANT: MR. ABBIREDDI SATISH KUMAR & ORS
JUDGE: Justice MINI PUSHKARNA

----JUDGMENT-----

The instant application has been preferred by the plaintiff under Order

VIII Rules 1 and 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“CPC”), for
pronouncement of judgment and passing of a decree against the defendants,
in the form of a permanent and mandatory injunction for restraining the
defendants, and further to award damages and actual costs of litigation in
favour of the plaintiff.
2. The present suit has been filed by the plaintiff under Section 134(1)
of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (“the Act”), read with Sections 27 and 29 of
the Act and Section 20(c) of CPC, seeking permanent and mandatory
injunction thereby restraining passing off and infringement of plaintiff‟s
marks /trade dress, i.e., “ORS-L”/ “ORSL”/ / /
/ .
3. The suit is filed on the grounds that the marks of the defendant no. 1,
i.e., “ORSI”/ , (“impugned
trade marks/trade dress”) are deceptiviely similar to the plaintiff‟s registered
marks/trade dress.

4. Facts, as canvassed in the plaint, are as follows:
4.1 Plaintiff company is a manufacturer of consumer healthcare products
and was incorporated in Singapore in the year 1974. It acquired the brand
ORS-L, ORSL and its formatives from one Jagdale Industries Limited vide
an Assignment Deed dated 07th November, 2014. Jagdale Industries Limited
had first introduced the ORS-L brand by way of flavoured electrolyte drinks
in 2003. The ORS-L Lemon flavour product has been used in India since as
early as the year 2003 and the ORS-L Orange and Apple flavours since as
early as the year 2005.
4.2 Since 2003 till December, 2013, Jagdale Industries Limited sold
electrolyte drinks under the trademark, ORS-L, which was subsequently
changed to ORSL in 2014, after acquisition by the plaintiff.
4.3 The plaintiff is the registered proprietor of the various formative
marks associated with ORS-L and ORSL, with relevant registrations in
Classes 30, 31, 32 and 33.
4.4 The defendants are involved in the business of inter alia energy and
refreshment drinks. The defendant no. 1, trading as M/s Sree International
India, operates from 1-183/1 Venkayammapeta, Kadiyam Mandal, East
Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh – 533126, whereas, defendant nos. 2 to
5 are partners of M/s Pure Tropic which operates from S.F. No. 220,
Viruandampalaym, Chengappalli, Tiruppur, Tamil Nadu – 638812.
4.5 Defendant no. 1 is the proprietor and marketer of the products bearing
the impugned marks and impugned trade dress. It has obtained registration
no. 5323696 dated 10th February, 2022 for the impugned mark,

, and has further applied for registration of its marks and trade
dress under Class 32 on a „proposed to be used basis‟ in November, 2022.
M/s Pure Tropic is the manufacturer of the products bearing the impugned
marks and impugned trade dress and is the operator of the website,
www.juscoco.com.
4.6 Plaintiff came across defendant no.1‟s products, bearing the impugned
mark and trade dress, in September, 2022. Immediately upon gaining
knowledge of the impugned marks and trade dress, a Cease-and-Desist
notice was issued through plaintiff‟s counsel on 05th September, 2022 to
defendant no. 1 and M/s Pure Tropic. However, the same could not be
delivered to defendant no. 1. In view of this, the plaintiff sent a reminder
letter dated 20th September, 2022, which again remained undelivered upon
defendant no. 1.
4.7 Thereafter, in June 2023, during an internet check, plaintiff found that
defendant no. 1 had filed an application no. 5525855 dated 12th July, 2022
for registration of the impugned mark, , in Class 32, against
which plaintiff filed an opposition on 13th June, 2023.
4.8 The plaintiff's subsequent market research and internet investigation
revealed that the defendant no.1 had introduced a different product

variation/ and submitted new applications for the registration
of the impugned marks and trade dress in Class 32. To avoid detection by
the plaintiff, the defendants substituted the letter „O‟ with „E‟, describing
their marks as “ERSI FRUIT DRINK”, “ERSI FRUIT DRINK APPLE”,
and “ERSI FRUIT DRINK ORANGE”.
4.9 Subsequently, in September, 2023, the plaintiff discovered that the
defendant no.1 had started marketing and selling its goods bearing the
impugned marks and trade dress on www.dhanalakshmiagency.in, an
interactive website that distributes the impugned goods throughout India,
including, Delhi. The aforementioned website exclusively represents only
the defendant no.1, as it includes only two products belonging to defendant
no.1.
4.10 The defendant nos. 2 to 5, have also posted listings of products
bearing the impugned marks and trade dress on other third-party websites,
such as IndiaMart.
5. Submissions on behalf of the plaintiff:
5.1 Plaintiff‟s products under the marks ORSL and its formatives are
marketed in a distinctive manner which is comprised of the unique
packaging, the distinctive style of writing ORSL and its formatives, the
colour combination, the stylized script, styling, and placement of
information about the product, form a part of the trade dress of ORSL and its

formatives/variants.
5.2 Other than deriving vast revenue from sales of products containing the
ORSL marks and trade dress, the plaintiff has also invested huge sums into
advertising and promoting its marks. As a result, the ORSL marks of
plaintiff have acquired substantial goodwill and are an extremely valuable
commercial asset of the plaintiff.
5.3 It is evident from the bare comparison of the plaintiff‟s mark/trade
dress and defendant no.1‟s impugned marks and trade dress that plaintiff‟s
red and white colour scheme has been copied by the defendant no. 1.
Further, defendant no.1‟s mark is virtually identical to
plaintiff‟s mark and is a deliberate attempt to confuse the
consumer by use of a particular font to represent the letter „I‟ in ORSI,
which can easily be confused as „L‟.
5.4 The placement of all the elements in the impugned trade dress, i.e.,
the brand name, the device of an apple, the descriptive matter, etc., are
identical to the plaintiff‟s distinctive trade dress. Further, even content of
descriptive matter in the impugned trade dress is almost identical to that of
plaintiff‟s trade dress. The colour combination in which the text and device,
appears on the top left corner of the impugned trade dress
is similar to the tagline and device, appearing on

plaintiff‟s trade dress.
5.5 Apart from the visual similarity, the malafide intent of the defendant
no.1 is also evident from the fact that the products offered under the
impugned marks and impugned trade dress are also identical to plaintiff‟s
goods. A clear case of passing off and infringement is made out against the
defendant no.1 as it has consciously sought to imitate the plaintiff‟s goods,
including, the trademark and packaging.
5.6 No written statement has been filed by any of the defendants and
therefore, the averments in the plaint, which have been adequately
substantiated by way of documentary proof, and have not been refuted by
the defendants, stand admitted. Therefore, there is no triable issue.
5.7 Defendants, in their reply to plaintiff‟s I.A. No. 1880/2025, have
raised the plea of framing of issues by the Court. However, the same is not
tenable as no written statement has been filed by the defendants. Moreover,
the issue of jurisdiction has already been decided by this Court vide
judgment dated 04th February, 2025, in I.A. 31224/2024.
6. Submissions on behalf of defendant nos. 1 to 6:
6.1 The Court ought to frame an issue on the question of jurisdiction
under Section 20(c) of CPC. The law dictates that the question of territorial
jurisdiction should ordinarily be decided at the outset. Even in terms of
Section 21(1) of CPC, any objection relating to place of suing cannot be
taken at the appellate or revisional stage if the same has not been agitated at
the earliest possible opportunity, i.e., before the Court of first instance.
6.2 The suit instituted by the plaintiff is not in accordance with the CPC
and Section 134 of the Act should not be violated.

6.3 The plaintiff did not address the Cease-and-Desist notice, dated 05th
September, 2022 and reminder letter, dated 20th September, 2022 to M/s
Pure Tropic. Both the notice and reminder letter were addressed to
defendant no.1 only. The answering defendants further submit that plaintiff‟s
letter dated 05th September, 2022, was addressed to defendant no.1, whereas,
M/s Pure Tropic was added as a recipient only by way of Carbon Copy
(“CC”). Thus, it is submitted that even as per the plaintiff, M/s Pure Tropic
has no relation to the present dispute.
6.4 Defendant no.1 is one of the many customers of M/s Pure Tropic and
therefore, defendant nos.2 to 5 should not be dragged into the present lis.
6.5 The defendant nos. 2 to 5 being a third-party service provider for the
defendant no.1 should not be made as a party to the suit in the first place as
they are only a service provider to defendant no. 1, who is a customer of
defendant nos. 2 to 5.
6.6 Based on the wrong representation by the plaintiff, the written
statement by defendant nos. 2 to 5 was not taken on record by the Joint
Registrar (Judicial) and the written statement was filed within 120 days, i.e.,
21st November, 2023 to 20th March, 2024. Therefore, the written statement
on behalf of defendant nos. 2 to 5 should be taken on record.
6.7 Defendant nos. 2 to 5 submit, that due to plaintiff‟s incorrect
representation of the latest date of service upon the said defendants, their
written statement has not been taken on record. It is contended that the
plaintiff, on 27th May, 2024, wrongly stated before the Joint Registrar
(Judicial) that the latest date of service was 19th November, 2023, whereas,
the latest date of service upon the defendants was 20th November, 2023.

6.8 M/s Pure Tropic has no relation to or involvement in trademarks/trade
dress of products of defendant no.1, as it only provides services of mixing
and blending, based on recipe/formulation given by customers for drinks,
such as fruit juices, plant-based milk, carbonated soft drinks, etc. The
packaging material, as well as the ingredients are also provided by the
customers. Thus, the role of M/s Pure Tropic is strictly restricted to the
edible matter inside the packaging, and not on the packet‟s mark/label.
7. Proceedings before the Court:
7.1 It is noted that vide judgement dated 07th December, 2023
(“injunction order”), this Court granted an interim injunction in favor of the
plaintiff and against the defendants, in the following manner:
―xxx xxx xxx
21. As such, pending disposal of the suit, the defendants as well as
all others acting on their behalf shall be restrained from using the
marks , or any
other confusingly or deceptively similar marks, for fruit drinks or
any other allied or cognate goods or services.
22. Though the Court is not interfering with the products which may
already have been released in the market, the defendants shall also
stand restrained from releasing into the market any stock of
manufactured infringing goods which may have already been
manufactured by them and lying in stock.
23. The defendants are also directed to forthwith remove, from all
physical and virtual sites, reference to the impugned marks ORSI/

and .
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
7.2 Subsequently, vide order dated 24th January, 2024, notice was issued
to defendant no. 6, i.e., M/s G International India, which is said to be
marketing the products of defendant no. 1 under a newly discovered mark,
i.e., .
7.3 Thereafter, vide order dated 09th February, 2024, notice was issued to
defendant nos. 7 and 8, i.e., M/s Kalluri Traders and M/s Venkata Sai
General Agencies, respectively.
7.4 Further, by way of the same order dated 09th February, 2024, on
account of claims by the plaintiff that the defendants along with others were
violating the injunction order dated 07th December, 2023, this Court
appointed six Local Commissioners to carry out local commissions in the
premises of the defendants.
7.5 Consequently, vide order dated 29th February, 2024, defendant nos. 6,
7 and 8 were impleaded as parties based upon the findings of the Local
Commissioners.
7.6 It is noted that an application, i.e., I.A. 30216/2024, was filed by
defendant nos. 2 to 5, seeking condonation of delay of 89 days in filing their
written statement, however, the same was dismissed vide order dated 27th

May, 2024, with the observations that the written statement was filed
beyond a period of 120 days. Therefore, by way of the said order, the right
of defendant nos. 2 to 5 to file their written statement was closed. Further,
by way of the same order, the right of defendant no. 1 to file its written
statement was closed as well.
7.7 This Court also notes that defendant nos. 6 and 7 were served with
summons on 22nd March, 2024, and defendant no. 8 was served on 27th
March, 2024, as recorded vide order dated 27th May, 2024. However, the
written statement has not been filed on their behalf, and thus, the permissible
time period as prescribed under the CPC, as amended by the Commercial
Courts Act, 2015, stands expired as well. Therefore, the right of defendant
nos. 6 to 8 to file their written statement already stands closed.
7.8 On account of the rights being closed for all the defendants in filing
their written statements, the present application has been filed by the
plaintiff under Order VIII Rules 1 and 10 of CPC.
7.9 It is also noted that during the course of the proceedings, defendant
no. 1 filed an application, i.e., I.A. 31224/2024, under Order VII Rule 11
CPC, seeking rejection of the plaint. The said application was dismissed by
this Court vide judgement dated 04th February, 2025, holding that this Court
has jurisdiction to entertain the present suit proceedings and that there exists
a clear cause of action against defendant no. 1.
8. In view of the aforenoted, this Court has proceeded with the matter,
whilst taking into consideration the non-filing of the written statements by
the defendants, the consequent filing of Order VIII Rule 10 CPC application,
and the reply filed on behalf of defendant nos. 1 and 6, along with defendant

nos. 2 to 5, to the present application.
9. Thus, while elucidating upon the scope of Order VIII Rule 10 CPC,
this Court, in the case of The Christian Broadcasting Network, INC Versus
CBN News Private Limited, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 11666, held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
13. The scope of Order 8 Rule 10 CPC in commercial suits
particularly under the New Commercial Courts, Commercial Division
and Commercial Appellate Division of the High Court Act, 2015 has
being examined by this court in Nirog Pharma Pvt. Ltd. v. Umesh
Gupta, (2016) 235 DLT 354. This court held as follows:
―11. Order VIII Rule 10 has been inserted by the legislature to
expedite the process of justice. The courts can invoke its
provisions to curb dilatory tactic, often resorted to by
defendants, by not filing the written statement by pronouncing
judgment against it. At the same time, the courts must be
cautious and judge the contents of the plaint and documents on
record as being of an unimpeachable character, not requiring
any evidence to be led to prove its contents.
……….
28. The present suit is also a commercial suit within the
definition of the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division
and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015
and it was the clear intention of the legislature that such cases
should be decided expeditiously and should not be allowed to
linger on. Accordingly, if the defendant fails to pursue his case
or does so in a lackadaisical manner by not filing his written
statement, the courts should invoke the provisions of Order
VIII Rule 10 to decree such cases.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
Findings and Analysis:
10. At the outset, this Court notes that the present suit is filed for
infringement and for passing off of the marks of the plaintiff and the trade
dress of its products sold under its registered marks.
11. It is noted that the marks/trade dress of defendant no. 1, as shown in

the plaint, which are alleged to have caused infringement and passing off of
the plaintiff‟s marks/trade dress, are as follows:
S.No
.
Application/
Registration
No.
Impugned Mark
(Word/Device)
Particulars
1. 5323696 Registered vide certificate
dated 19.09.2022 and
valid/renewed upto
10.02.2032.
Currently, a rectification is
filed before the Registry by
M/s NUTRIMENTO
PVT.LTD.
2. 5525855 Application filed on
12.07.2022 on a ‗proposed to
be used basis‘.
Currently, the same is
reflected as ‗abandoned‘.

3. 5695523 Application filed on
23.11.2022 on a ‗proposed to
be used basis‘.
Currently, the same is
reflected as ‗abandoned‘.
4. 5695524 Application filed on
23.11.2022 on a ‗proposed to
be used basis‘.
Currently, the same is
reflected as ‗abandoned‘.
12. This Court notes that defendant no. 1‟s mark under registration no.
5323696, i.e., /ERSI Fruit Drink (logo), is currently registered
and a rectification before the Trade Marks Registry is filed towards the
same. However, it is to be noted that if this Court decides in favour of the
plaintiff, an action for passing off can nevertheless be maintainable against
the said mark.
13. It is further noted that vide order dated 09th February, 2024,
submissions of plaintiff were recorded with regard to several other

marks/trade dress of defendant no.1, which the plaintiff came across, that
continued to be deceptively similar and confusing in comparison to
plaintiff‟s marks/trade dress. Submission on behalf of the plaintiff was noted
that the defendants were continuing to manufacture goods under the newly
discovered infringing marks/trade dress, despite the injunction order
restraining the defendants from using ―any other confusingly or deceptively
similar marks‖. Therefore, it was submitted that the usage of the newly
discovered marks/trade dress is in violation of the injunction order. The
newly discovered marks of defendant no. 1, as brought to the notice of this
Court, are reproduced as under:
Plaintiff‘s Marks/Trade Dress and Goodwill:
14. At this stage, it would be relevant to examine the rights vested in the

plaintiff with respect to its marks/trade dress. The plaintiff is the proprietor
of several registered marks under Classes 30, 31, 32 and 33, which are valid
and subsisting, earliest of which has been in use in India since the year 2003,
details of which, are reproduced as under:


15. It is noted that for marks bearing registration nos. 1202213, 1218294,
1218295 and 1823685, under Class 32, the plaintiff, by way of Assignment

Deed dated 07
th November, 2014, has procured the rights towards the said
marks through its predecessor-in-interest, i.e., Jagdale Industries Limited.
Further, the mark of the plaintiff for ORS-L Apple Drink, i.e.,
, bearing no. 2351430 under Class 32, is currently
under opposition before the Trade Marks Registry, amongst other marks.
16. Further, the plaintiff is the registered proprietor of several marks in its
favour and has obtained registrations for its marks, across various
jurisdications in the world, including, but not limited to Bhutan, Kenya,
Philippines, Singapore, Vietnam, Tanzania, Zanzibar, Malaysia and
Myanmar. Documents corroborating the same are on record.
17. Moreover, the plaintiff has made substantial sales and earned
significant revenue through the ORSL and its formative marks. A statement
of annual sales in India for the period of 2014 (fourth quarter) to 2023, as
shown in the plaint, is as follows:

18. Furthermore, the plaintiff has incurred considerable expenditure in
relation to marketing and promotion in India for its ORSL and its formative
marks. Documents, in relation to promotion and advertisement, are placed
on record. The sales figures for the period of 2014 (fourth quarter) to 2023,
as shown in the plaint, are as follows:

19. This Court notes that the plaintiff‟s products bearing the plaintiff‟s
mark, i.e., ORSL/ORS-L, are sold over the counter at pharmacies, as well as
through several e-commerce platforms, such as, Apollo Pharmacy, 1mg,
NetMeds, Amazon India, etc.
20. This Court further notes the submission on behalf of the plaintiff that
they have a distinctive packaging/trade dress for the products under their
registered marks, and the said packaging and its colour combination, the
stylized script, styling, and placement of information about the product,
form a part of the trade dress of ORSL and its formative variants.
21. This Court also takes into account that the plaintiff has been
continuously and bonafidely using its ORSL and other formative marks in
India since the year 2003, whereas, the earliest registration in favour of
defendant no.1 is granted from its date of application, i.e., 10th February,
2022 for its mark, ERSI.
22. Thus, on account of prior use as well as the revenue and expenditure
of the plaintiff in relation to its ORSL and formative marks, the goods of the
plaintiff are associated with the plaintiff company itself. Therefore, if this
Court comes to the conclusion that products bearing the impugned
marks/trade dress are indeed deceptively similar and confusing in
comparison to the plaintiff‟s marks/trade dress, it would behove upon this
Court to protect the rights and goodwill associated with the plaintiff in the
said marks/trade dress.
Comparison of Plaintiff and Defendant no. 1‘s marks/packaging:
23. At this stage, it would be pertinent to compare the marks and
packaging/trade dress of both the parties. A comparative table towards the

same, as given in the plaint, is as under:

24. A perusal of the aforesaid makes it evident that the defendant no.1 has
attempted to come as close as possible to the marks and the packaging/trade
dress of the plaintiff. The misapproriation on part of the defendant no. 1 is
writ large, and in the first instance can be seen in the packaging itself,
wherein, the placement of the information and pictorial representaion of the
fruit is similar to that of the plaintiff‟s packaging. Further, the colour scheme
used in the trade dress of the plaintiff‟s product has been adopted in toto by
the defendant no. 1. Moreover, even though the defendant‟s mark is „ERSL‟,
however, the manner in which the „E‟ is presented in the mark, with a round
shape, is similar to an „O‟, and the addition of an unnoticeble cut in the
middle of the letter „E‟, nevetheless throws the impression that the „E‟ is
an „O‟.
25. Furthermore, this Court cannot ignore the newly discovered marks of

the defendant no. 1, as recorded in order dated 09th Febraury, 2024. Thus, it
would be apposite to reproduce the marks/packaging of the plaintff, i.e.,
ORSL and the newly discovered mark/packaging of the defendant no.1, i.e.,
ElectroORS. A comparitive table of the plaintiff‟s marks/trade dress,
defendant no.1‟s marks/trade dress, including, the newly discovered
marks/trade dress, are reproduced as under:
26. Upon perusal of the above, it can be seen that in relation to the newly
discovered marks and its reproduction thereof, the packaging/trade dress is
deceptively similar to both the plaintiff‟s packaging and the earlier
packaging of the defendant no. 1.

27. It is noted that the injunction order restrained the usage of any similar
mark/trade dress/packaging by the defendants. By way of usage of a
packaging similar to the plaintiff‟s and only making minor alterations in the
new packaging, the defendant no.1 has not changed the likelihood of
confusion and deception that can occur.
28. It is further noted that in the written submissions filed by defendant
no.1, defendant no.1 has categorically admitted that production and
distribution of the impugned products bearing the infringing marks/trade
dress for defendant no.1‟s products, including, ElectroORS, were stopped.
29. Therefore, on account of the aforsaid observations, it becomes clear
that the marks and packaging/trade dress adopted by the defendant no. 1,
would lead to confusion and deception amongst the consumers. Thus, while
discussing the aspect of confusion that can occur with consumers, the
Division Bench of this Court, in the case of South India Beverages Pvt.
Ltd. Versus General Mills Marketing Inc., 2014 SCC OnLine Del 1953,
held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
39. It is also a settled proposition of law that where products are
virtually identical, as they are in the present case, ‗the degree of
similarity in the marks necessary to support a finding of infringement
is less than in the case of dissimilar, non-competing products.‘ [Eaton
Allen Corp. (Supra)]
xxx xxx xxx
49. Since time immemorial the Supreme Court has consistently
sounded a note of caution that the competing marks have to be
compared keeping in mind an unwary purchaser of average
intelligence and imperfect recollection. [AIR 1963 SC 449 Amritdhara
Pharmacy v. Satyadeo Gupta]
50. Consumers of any product do not deliberately memorize marks.
They only retain a general, indefinite, vague, or even hazy

impression of a mark and so may be confused upon encountering a
similar mark. Consumers may equate a new mark or experience
with one that they have long experienced without making an effort
to ascertain whether or not they are the same marks. The
consideration therefore is whether one mark may trigger a confused
recollection of another mark. Thus, if the marks give the same
general impression confusion is likely to occur.
51. With a view to further foster our understanding of the concept of
similarity and likelihood of confusion arising in trademark
jurisprudence, we may profitably take cue from the analogous
principle of ‗observability‘ which is applied in the context of copyright
laws.
52. The ‗ordinary observer‘ test is applied to determine if two works
are substantially similar. The Court will look to the response of an
‗average lay observer‘ to ascertain whether a copyright holder's
original expression is identifiable in the allegedly infringing work
274 F.2d 487 (2nd Cir. 1960) Peter Pan Fabrics Inc. v. Martin
Weiner Corp. Since it is employed to determine qualitative and
quantitative similarity in visual copyright work, the said test can also
be usefully applied in the domain of trademark law as well.
53. The Courts have reiterated that the test for substantial similarity
involves viewing the product in question through the eyes of the
layman. A layman is not expected to have the same ‗hair-splitting‘
skills as an expert. A punctilious analysis is not necessary. A layman
is presumed to have the cognition and experiences of a reasonable
man. Therefore, if a reasonable observer is likely to get confused
between the two products then a copyright violation is said to take
place.
54. Transposing the said principles in the context of trademark
infringement, one may venture to assess similarity and likelihood of
confusion between rival marks on the touchstone of the impression
gathered by a reasonable observer, who is a layman as opposed to a
connoisseur.
xx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
s
30. Moreover, the present case is a clear example, wherein, the Triple
Identity Test is satisfied. The marks/trade dress of the parties, are similar.
The areas of operation/business are the same, and the target consumers are

also similar. Therefore, there is a complete likelihood that deception and
confusion will occur with the consumers. Thus, this Court in the case of
Heifer Project International Versus Heifer Project India Trust, 2024 SCC
OnLine Del 2847, held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
30. Indeed, the present case is a classic instance of ‗triple identity.‘
The Impugned trademarks are nearly identical, as are the areas of
operation, and the segments of the public they target. Therefore, the
Defendants' use of these nearly identical and deceptively similar
marks is certain to cause deception and confusion among the
general public. Besides, the Defendants have persistently engaged in
activities that unlawfully exploit Plaintiff's reputation and goodwill.
Even after the termination of their contractual relationship and the
explicit withdrawal of rights to use the Plaintiff's trademarks and
logos, Defendants have unauthorisedly continued use of their
deceptively similar marks. This defiance not only violates the
agreement but also misleads the public and the relevant stakeholders
regarding the nature of Defendants' affiliation with Plaintiff.
Defendants have further compounded their infringement by falsely
representing their relationship with Plaintiff. They have insinuated to
the public and stakeholders that they remain affiliated or integrally
connected with Plaintiff, thereby undermining Plaintiff's
brand/trademark integrity and causing confusion about its unique
identity in the marketplace. Defendants lack any legal right or
justification to the use of contested marks, or applying for their
registration of identical marks for conducting any business activities.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
31. Therefore, this Court is of the considered opinion that the impugned
marks/trade dress/packaging used by defendant no. 1 will cause confusion
and deception to any unwary purchaser, especially, qua goods which are
easily available as over-the-counter products, and readily available on ecommerce platforms, as well. The fact that the products of both the parties
are catering to a similar customer base, with a similar trade channel, and on

account of the deceptive similarity of defendant no. 1‟s marks/trade dress, it
is in all likelihood that the impugned marks/trade dress of defendant no. 1
will cause confusion and deception amongst the consumers. Thus, the
defendant no.1‟s marks/trade dress will constitute infringement and passing
off of the marks/trade dress of the plaintiff.
Use of Prefix or Suffix in the Word ORS:
32. At this stage, this Court notes the order dated 02nd February, 2024,
that has been issued by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
(“FSSAI”), wherein, it is stipulated that „ORS‟ along with other prefix or
suffix may be used as a whole in consonance with Section 17 of the Act.
The said order states that the product in question shall provide a prominent
declaration on their front of pack that, ―The product is NOT a ORS formula
as recommended by WHO‖. The order dated 02nd February, 2024 issued by
the FSSAI, as on record before this Court, is reproduced as under:



33. Thus, it is manifest that the only restriction on the use of „ORS‟ as a
mark, is that the same has to be used with a prefix or a suffix, with the
disclaimer that the same is not an ORS formula as recommended by the
World Health Organization (“WHO”).
34. In the present case, the plaintiff has adopted the mark in consonance
with the aforesaid guidelines, by adopting a suffix and also by clearly stating
on its pack that the same is a, “Ready To Serve Fruit Beverage‖ and ―NOT
AN ORS‖. Images of the product of the plaintiff, is reproduced as under:

35. It is to be noted that though the guidelines of the FSSAI stipulate
regarding using ORS along with prefix or suffix, the same does not imply
that a party can adopt a deceptively similar mark or trade dress as noted
above, that may amount to infringement or passing off. It is evident in the
present case that the defendant no.1‟s marks/trade dress, constitute
infringement and passing off of the marks/trade dress of the plaintiff.
Territorial Jurisdiction:
36. This Court notes the submissions on behalf of defendant nos. 1 to 6,
that there is no territorial jurisdiction vested with this Court. The said
defendants have substantiated the said challenge of jurisdiction as the major
part of their arguments before this Court and the reply to the present
application. Moreover, a prayer with respect to taking on record the written
statements has been made in addition to the challenge of territorial
jurisdiction.
37. At this juncture, this Court notes that the said challenge to the
territorial jurisiction of this Court has already been dealt with by way of the
judgment dated 04th February, 2025, which was passed in the Order VII
Rule 11 application filed by defendant no. 1. Relevent portions of the

judgment dated 04th February, 2025, is reproduced as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
15. The use of a mark, has been defined in Section 2(2)(c) of the
Trademarks Act, which has been construed as a reference to the use of
the mark upon, or in any physical or in any other relation whatsoever,
to such goods. Thus, offering the goods for sale or advertising the
goods for sale, would be construed as use of the goods.
16. Considering the aforesaid, the averment of the defendants that
this Court does not have territorial jurisdiction, has essentially to be
rejected. The defendants have raised a plea that their products are
not sold in Delhi. However, when the plaintiff has categorically
averred, and shown that it has been able to successfully place order
for the products of the defendants, subject matter of the suit, from
within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court, even though the
products may not have been delivered to the plaintiff, this Court
would have territorial jurisdiction.
xxx xxx xxx
19. Considering the averments made in the plaint, it is manifest that
this Court has jurisdiction in the present matter. The plaintiff has
made categorical averments in the plaint as regards placing an order
for the products of the defendants in Delhi. Thus, when the website
marketing the goods of the defendants is accessible from Delhi,
though the said website may have stopped its operation
subsequently, and products may not have been ultimately delivered
in Delhi, the very fact that the said website could be accessed with
the products of the defendants shown online, at the time of filing of
the suit, this Court would have territorial jurisdiction. The same
would constitute use in relation to goods, as the goods of the
defendants were promoted and advertised through the third-party
website, within the jurisdiction of this Court, at the time of filing of
the suit.
xxx xxx xxx
21. It is clear from the averments made in the plaint that the cause
of action has arisen in Delhi and therefore, this Court has
jurisdiction to entertain the present suit proceedings.
22. By a bare perusal of the averments made in the plaint, it is clear
that there is a clear cause of action, against inter alia, the defendant
no.1. The said defendant has failed to establish any ground for
rejection of plaint under Order VII Rule 11 CPC, whereas, on the
contrary the plaintiff has raised triable issues before this Court.

23. Considering the detailed submission hereinabove, the present
application is found devoid of any merits. The same is accordingly
dismissed.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
38. By way of the aforesaid judgement, it has already been held that this
Court has territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the present matter. Thus,
if any challenge has to be raised by the defendants in that regard, the same
has to be done primarily by way of appeal or under the normal recourse of
law. However, the said challenge cannot be reiterated and raised time and
again, when the findings towards the same have attained finality.
39. As regards the prayer for bringing on record the written statements,
this Court cannot accede to the same, as the defendants, despite having the
recourse available to them for challenging the order closing their rights to
file the written statements, failed to do so. Therefore, the submission in that
regard is irrelevant for adjudication at this stage, and for the present
application.
Local Commissioner Reports:
40. It would also be pertinent to refer to the findings of the Local
Commissioners appointed by way of the order dated 09th February, 2024 to
visit the premises of the defendants, in order to ascertain whether any
infringing goods in violation of the injunction order, were manufactured and
stored at the said premises.
41. The findings of the Local Commissioners in their respective reports
with respect to the quantity of infringing goods found, and invoices or bills
raised after the injunction order dated 07
th December, 2023, are noted as
under:

S.No. Particulars of
the Reports
Infringing Goods/Material Found
1. Date: 21.02.2024
Premises of:
Defendant No. 6
– M/s G
International
India
1. Total Apple ERSL & Orange ERSL Drinks = 31,560
tetra packs.
2. Damages and spoilt tetra packs = 12 cases
3. Unused cartons (packaging material) = 24 bundles
4. Three samples of tetra packs with manufacturing dates
noted as 24.11.2023, 04.12.2023, 08.12.2023.
5. E-way bill dated 31.01.2024 valid till 01.02.2024, in
the name of defendant no. 6 and recipient being
defendant no. 7 for the product ElectroORS Apple
Fruit Drink having value of goods of Rs. 1,72,500/-.
2. Date: 21.02.2024
Premises of:
Defendant No. 7
– M/s Kalluri
Traders
1. 293 boxes of with each box having 60 tetra packs.
2. 28 boxes each with around 30 tetra packs.
3. 8 tetra packs of ElectroORS.
4. Invoices from 2022-23.
5. Invoice dated 05.01.2024 for purchase by defendant
no. 7 from defendant no. 6 for goods worth Rs.
2,80,698/-.
6. Samples found with manufacturing date as
01.01.2024.
3. Date: 26.02.2024
Premises of:
Defendant nos. 2
to 5 – M/s Pure
Tropic (Partners)
1. ERSI Fruit Drink Apple = 1,32,240 packs (boxes) and
29,400 packs (trays)
2. ElectroORS Fruit Drink Apple = 27,000 packs
3. CRSI Fruit Drink Orange = 66,630 packs
4. Packaging material bearing the impugned marks
through which the number of tetra packs that can be
made = 20,03,187 packs.
5. Empty Carton Boxes and Trays bearing the infringing
marks = 34,600.
6. Samples found with manufacturing dates as
16.11.2023, 28.11.2023, 12.12.2023, 30.01.2024,
12.02.2024.
7. Invoices from 2022-23.
8. Invoice raised by defendants nos. 2 to 5 to defendant
no. 1 dated 12.12.2023 for an amount of Rs.

46,67,979.01/- for packaging paper of ERSI, CRSI
and ElectroORS.
9. Invoice raised by defendant nos. 2 to 5 to defendant
no. 1 dated 13.12.2023 for an amount of Rs.
2,54,880/- for packaging charges of ERSI Apple and
Orange.
10. Invoice raised by one Arulmurugan Packaging to
defendant no. 1 dated 22.12.2023 for an amount of Rs.
63,498.75/- for ElectroORS Apple, wherein defendant
nos. 2 to 5 are the consignee.
11. Invoice raised by Arulmurugan Packaging to
defendant no. 1 dated 10.02.2024 for an amount of Rs.
1,02,295.38/- for ERSI Apple wherein defendant nos.
2 to 5 are the consignee.
12. Invoice raised by Arulmurugan Packaging to
defendant no. 1 dated 12.02.2024 for an amount of Rs.
76,267.53/- for ERSI Apple wherein defendant nos. 2
to 5 are the consignee.
4. Date: 01.03.2024
Premises of:
Defendant no. 8 –
M/s Venkata Sai
General Agencies
1. Approximately 2000 boxes with 60 pieces each, i.e.,
1,20,000 infringing goods found.
2. Invoice dated 31.01.2024 for purchase from defendant
no. 1 by defendant no. 8 for an amount of Rs.
15,12,000/- for 1,08,000 pieces for ElectroORS Apple
drinks.
5. Date: 16.03.2024
Premises of:
Defendant nos. 2
to 5 – M/s Pure
Tropic (Partners)
No products of infringing nature were found as the
premises are only for receipt of posts and other
communications of defendant nos. 2 to 5.
6. Date: 19.03.2024
Premises of:
Defendant no. 1 –
Mr. Abbireddi
Satish Kumar
trading as M/s
Sree International
India
1. ElectroORS Apple dated 01.01.2024 = 12,720 + 94
packs
2. ERSI Fruit Drink Orange Zero Sugar = 2 loose packs
3. ERSI Fruit Drink Apple = 12 loose packs
4. ElectroORS Fruit Drink Apple = 6 loose packs

42. Perusal of the above findings of the Local Commissioners brings to
the fore that despite passing of the injunction order dated 07
th December,
2023, products bearing the infringing marks/trade dress of defendant no. 1,
were still being manufactured, and supplied to the distributors. Furthermore,
bulk quantities of goods bearing the impugned marks/trade dress were found
at the premises of the defendants.
43. It has been held time and again that under Order VIII Rule 10 CPC,
the Court is empowered to take into consideration the reports of the Local
Commissioners as evidence and pass a judgement. Thus, this Court, in the
case of Sandisk LLC and Another Versus Laxmi Mobiles and Others, 2023
SCC OnLine Del 432, held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
17. Since there is no written statement on behalf of Defendants,
despite service of summons, this Court is empowered to pass a
judgment in terms of Order VIII Rule 10 of Civil Procedure Code,
1908. The report of the Local Commissioner can be read in evidence
in terms of Order XXVI Rule 10(2) of CPC. [See : ML Brother
LLP v. Maheshkumar Bhuralal Tanna]. Therefore, in light of the
Reports of Local Commissioners, and evidence collected by them, as
well as non-filing of written statements, this Court is of the opinion
that no ex parte evidence is required to be led. This view is supported
by decisions of this Court in Disney Enterprises Inc. v. Balraj
Muttneja, and Cross Fit LLC v. RTB Gym and Fitness Centre. As
regards claim of damages, this Court is convinced that this is not a
case of innocent adoption, and Defendants‘ conduct invites the award
of damages. Taking a reasonable assessment of the volume of seizure
made, nature of counterfeiting indulged into by Defendants, in the
opinion of the Court, Plaintiffs are entitled to nominal damages,
purpose of which has been laid out in the judgment of this Court
in Indian Performing Right Society v. Debashis Patnaik.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
44. Thus, in consideration of the Local Commissioner Reports and the

averments made on behalf of the plaintiff, this Court is of the view that
evidence is not required to be led in the present matter. Moreover, in order
to ascertain the culpability of the defendants with respect to the infringing
goods, the reports of the Local Commissioners shall be considered by this
Court.
Culpability of the Defendants:
A. Defendant nos. 2 to 5:
45. Defendant nos. 2 to 5, who are the partners in M/s Pure Tropic, have
made a challenge that they are only the service providers to defendant no. 1,
who is one of many of the customers of defendant nos. 2 to 5. Therefore,
they are absolved from any liability towards the actions on the part of
defendant no. 1.
46. This Court notes that the said defendant nos. 2 to 5 were served upon
with the Cease-and-Desist notice dated 05th September, 2022, and a
reminder letter dated 20th September, 2022, was also served upon defendant
nos. 2 to 5, on behalf of the plaintiff. However, it is the case of defendant
nos. 2 to 5 that they were only in „CC‟ to the Cease-and-Desist notice sent
to defendant no. 1, to whom the notice was addressed to.
47. Even if this Court was to accept the said argument on behalf of
defendant nos. 2 to 5, regardless, the said defendants were served with
summons vide order dated 06th November, 2023, and notice was also served
upon them in the application under Order XXXIX Rules 1 & 2 CPC.
48. It is noted that defendant nos. 2 to 5 are manufacturers of the goods,
which are sold under the infringing marks/packaging of the defendant no. 1.
Therefore, on account of the several intimations and notices, and the fact

that they are the manufacturers of the goods in question, albeit, a service
provider, the same does not absolve their liability in aiding defendant no.1 in
carrying out the infringing activities. The said defendants cannot be ignorant
towards the rights of the plaintiff, nor towards the orders and directions
passed by this Court.
49. This Court notes that despite the said defendants having been
restrained from using the impugned marks and packaging/trade dress by way
of the injunction order, they were found to have violated the injunction order
by continuing to manufacture the infringing products. The same is evidenced
from the ‗date of manufacturing‘ recorded by the Local Commissioners in
several of the infringing goods found at the premises of the defendants, that
bore the manufacturing dates for the months of January and February, 2024.
50. Furthermore, as recorded above in Sr. No. 3 of the aforesaid table of
findings of Local Commissioners, products with manufacturing date of 12th
December, 2023, 30th January, 2024 and 12th February, 2024 were found,
which are beyond the period of the injunction order dated 07th December,
2023, and a substantial number of products bearing the infringing
marks/trade dress have been found. Moreover, invoices in relation to
business dealings for substantial amounts, and for the products under the
infringing marks/trade dress dated 12th December, 2023, 13th December,
2023, 22nd December, 2023, 10th February, 2024, and 12th February, 2024,
were also found.
51. This Court in no manner can disregard the findings of the Local
Commissioners with respect to the infringing goods found at the premises of
the defendants. The fact that the summons and various notices were served

upon defendant nos. 2 to 5 is indisputable, and therefore, any contention
with respect to not being aware of the injunction order or its directions,
cannot be accepted.
52. This Court also notes the conduct of defendant nos. 2 to 5 with respect
to the present proceedings. The said defendants, despite being served the
summons, failed to file the written statement in the prescribed period, and
further even failed to reply to the application under Order XXXIX Rules 1 &
2 of the CPC. Further, the argument on behalf of defendant nos. 2 to 5 that
they played no role in the present infringing activity and that they are the
service providers, cannot be held to be tenable. The said defendants were
made aware of the nature of the present proceedings and the injunction order
time and again, and despite being the manufacturer of defendant no. 1‟s
infringing products, the defendant nos. 2 to 5 did not stop the manufacturing,
and the same is corroborated by the products that were found at their
premises, which had the date of manufacturing after the injunction order.
53. In this regard, it would be useful to refer to the reply filed on behalf of
defendant nos. 2 to 5, to the present application, wherein, it has been stated
as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
2. M/s Pure Tropic provide services of mixing and blending based on
recipe or formulation given by the customers for drinks like fruit juices,
plant-based milk, carbonated soft drinks and other beverages for our
customers. The customers supply all the raw material, packing material
and all the ingredients required. M/s Pure Tropic does process the raw
materials and fill in the packages provided by the customers. M/s Pure
Tropic is never involved in trademarks/trade dress or labelling of the
packages. M/s Pure Tropic never engages in promoting or marketing or
selling of the products of our customers. The customers take delivery of
the finished good from our factory. M/s Pure Tropic‘s limited role and

responsibility are strictly restricted to edible matter inside the packages
not the labelling on the packages. M/s Sree International India,
Defendant 1 of one of many customers. M/s Pure Tropic has nothing to
do with the present suit. M/s Pure Tropic should not be dragged into the
suit.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
54. Therefore, the submission on part of defendant nos. 2 to 5 that they
are absolved from any blame with regard to the present proceedings, when
they continued to manufacture products despite the injunction order, is
fallacious. Moreover, the fact that they continued to manufacture would
resultantly mean that defendant no. 1 continued to order for the same, and
defendant nos. 2 to 5, in non-compliance with the order of this Court,
continued to manufacture the products, and as per their own admission,
filled in the packages with the impugned marks and trade dress/packaging,
provided by defendant no.1.
55. Therefore, this Court is of the view that defendant nos. 2 to 5, despite
not being the proprietors of the infringing marks, nevertheless, played a
substantial part in supporting and aiding defendant no. 1 in manufacturing
the products with the infringing marks/trade dress, despite having
knowledge of the present proceedings and the injunction order passed by
this Court.
B. Defendant No. 6:
56. This Court notes that notice was issued to defendant no. 6 vide order
dated 24th January, 2024. Further, the submission of the plaintiff is noted
that they had, by way of communication dated 19th January, 2024, intimated
to defendant no. 6, with regard to the present proceedings.

57. It is noted that in Sr. No. 1 of the aforesaid table of findings of Local
Commissioners, it was observed that substantial goods bearing the
infringing marks/trade dress were found at the premises of defendant no. 6,
however, the samples as collected by the Local Commissioner from
defendant no.6‟s premises, bore the dates, i.e., 24th November, 2023, 04th
December, 2023 and 08
th December, 2023. Thus, one sample indicated the
manufacturing date of 08
th December, 2023, which is beyond the date of the
injunction order dated 07
th December, 2023. It is also observed that an Eway Bill dated 31st January, 2024 which was valid till 01st February, 2024
was also found in relation to products bearing the infringing marks/trade
dress at the premises of defendant nos. 6.
58. Therefore, on account of the aforenoted, this Court is of the view that
defendant no. 6, is also liable as it undertook business activity which is
clearly indicated by the E-way bill dated 31st January, 2024, which was
subsequent to even the plaintiff‟s intimation dated 19th January, 2024,
received by it regarding the present proceedings.
C. Defendant Nos. 7 and 8:
59. It is noted that this Court vide order dated 09th February, 2024,
observed the submissions of the plaintiff that defendant nos. 7 and 8 are the
distributors of the infringing products that were manufactured by defendant
nos. 2 to 5. Further, it was noted that products with the manufacturing date
past the date of the injunction order, were also found at the premises of
defendant nos. 7 and 8. The relevant portion of order dated 09th February,
2024 in this regard, is reproduced as under:
―xxx xxx xxx

4. Said distributors, being two in number, were identified by
plaintiff as under:
(i) M/s Kalluri Traders – Mentada Road, Near New Bipass
Road, Gajapathinagaram – 535 270, Andhra Pradesh;
(ii) M/s Venkata Sai General Agencies – Opposite Sri Vidya
School, D.No. 35—46- 4, Rly. Statioon road, Tanuku –
534421, Andhra Pradesh.
5. They were intimated about injunction order and subsequently,
on 30th January, 2024, an investigator, upon request by the plaintiff,
visited the premises of these two agencies and it was found that
numerous cartons of products bearing the marks
(―impugned marks‖) were available
for purchase.
6. Pursuant to the sample purchase of the said products, the
manufacturing dates were of December, 2023 and January, 2024,
which happen to be post the passage of the injunction order dated 7th
December, 2023.
7. Counsel for plaintiff contends that by manufacturing and
distributing any product bearing the impugned marks or having the
trade dress similar to plaintiff‘s trade dress (which is registered as a
trademark in favour of plaintiff) is a violation of the injunction order.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
60. As recorded above in Sr. Nos. 2 and 4 of the aforesaid table of
findings of Local Commissioners, upon visit to the premises of defendant
nos. 7 & 8, a substantial number of products bearing the infringing
marks/trade dress were found, along with invoices in relation to purchase by
defendant nos. 7 & 8, of the products under the infringing marks/trade dress
dated 05th January, 2024 and 31
st January, 2024.
61. This Court notes that defendant nos. 7 & 8 were impleaded as parties

vide order dated 29
th February, 2024. However, as per the submissions of
plaintiff recorded in order dated 09th February, 2024, defendant nos. 7 & 8
were informed of the current proceedings on 30th January, 2024 itself.
Despite the same, there exists a purchase by defendant no. 8 from defendant
no. 1, which is corroborated by the invoice dated 31st January, 2024. Thus, it
becomes apparent that defendant no. 8 is also required to face liability, on
account of being aware of the proceedings before this Court, and still
continuing to place an order with defendant no. 1.
62. In regard to defendant no. 7, the latest invoice that was found was
dated 05th January, 2024, which was for a purchase from defendant no. 6.
However, defendant no. 7 was the recipient/purchaser of goods in question
from defendant no. 6 and an E-way bill dated 31st January, 2024
corroborates the same. Therefore, defendant no. 7 must also be held liable
on account of being aware of the present proceedings and still conducting
business activities in relation to the infringing marks/trade dress.
D. Defendant No. 1:
63. Defendant no. 1 is the primary defendant in the present matter and the
proprietor/applicant of the impugned marks/trade dress/packaging. This
Court has already made the finding that the impugned marks and the trade
dress/packaging of defendant no. 1, are infringing and constitute passing off
of the marks/trade dress used in the plaintiff‟s goods.
64. This Court makes reference to Sr. No. 6 in the aforesaid table of
findings of Local Commissioners, noting that substantial products were
found bearing the infringing marks and trade dress/packaging in the
premises of defendant no. 1.

65. This Court also notes that defendant no. 1 continued to not only use
the infringing marks/trade dress in question, but had continued to violate the
injunction order as well. Moreover, as pointed out by the plaintiff in relation
to the newly discovered mark/trade dress, i.e., , this Court has
given the finding that the products under the said mark, clearly bear
deceptively similar packaging to the plaintiff‟s trade dress/packaging.
66. The defendant no. 1, by way of its infringing activity, not only had the
knowledge of the present proceedings, the plaintiff‟s product and the
injunction order, but despite the same, continued to engage the other
defendants for manufacturing, distributing and marketing of the infringing
products.
67. Any infringing goods and invoices in relation to manufacturing by
defendant nos. 2 to 5 for the said goods, would be with the awareness and
approval of defendant no. 1. Further, any marketing by defendant no. 6 or
distribution by defendant nos. 7 & 8, along with invoices indicating
purchase towards the same, would also be with the assent and approval of
defendant no. 1. Therefore, all the observations as made above regarding
culpability of infringement and passing off by other defendants, is due to the
invocation of the same by defendant no. 1.
68. The other defendants are liable for their part with regard to the
conduct of business activity despite knowledge of the orders and
proceedings before this Court. However, defendant no. 1 has time and again,
despite being aware, either attempted to circumvent the orders of this Court,
or directly violated the orders of this Court and rights of the plaintff in its

marks and trade dress/packaging.
69. The malafide on part of defendant no. 1 is further indicated by the fact
that they sought registration of several marks, similar to „ERSI‟, wherein,
only the first letter of the mark was changed, i.e., „ARSI‟, „BRSI‟, „DRSI‟,
etc. A table showing details of the said marks, as noted earlier also, is
reproduced as under:
70. At this stage, this Court notes that defendant no. 1 in its written
submissions dated 22nd March, 2025, categorically admitted that it had
stopped the usage of the infringing marks and trade dress since April, 2024.
The said averment is reproduced as under:

―xxx xxx xxx
14. The moment the defendant no. 1 approached his counsel to
represent him, he got two advices from the counsel (i) to absolutely
abide by the injunction order (ii) "good wine needs no bush". The
defendant followed the advice fully. The production and distribution of
the impugned products were stopped immediately. The defendant
completely changed the trade dress for his product ELECTROORS
and started the business afresh from April 2024. The defendants
completely abandoned the impugned trade mark and trade dress and
no intention at all to revive it.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
71. Thus, by way of defendant nos. 1‟s own admission, the said defendant
stopped the usage of the impugned marks and trade dress since April, 2024,
whereas, the injunction order was dated 07th December, 2023. The said
averment further corroborates and confirms the findings of the Local
Commissioners regarding discovery of products bearing infringing
marks/trade dress.
72. Therefore, defendant no. 1 is liable, as it has carried out infringing
activities under the marks which have been held to have either infringed or
passed off the marks and packaging/trade dress of the plaintiff‟s products.
Further, defendant nos. 2 to 5, being the manufacturers, have continued to
manufacture the goods sold under the infringing marks, despite the
injunction order and despite being aware of the injunction order. Moreover,
defendants nos. 7 & 8 being the distributors of the goods under the
infringing marks and defendant no. 6 being the marketer, are liable as well.
The involvement and roles of the other defendants, makes apparent the
malafide intent of defendant no. 1 with regard to conduct of business under
the infringing marks/trade dress.

Costs and Damages:
73. On the aspect of costs and damages, this Court notes the submission
of the plaintiff that they ought to be awarded the actual litigation costs,
along with damages for the infringing acts of the defendants, and punitive
damages for the violations of the interim order of this Court by the
defendants.
74. The present is a case of blatant infringement and passing off on part
of defendant no. 1. The conduct of defendant no.1 is all the more egregious
on account of the factum of continued usage in relation to the infringing
marks and trade dress/packaging, despite the injunction order passed by this
Court. As noted above, the other defendants in their roles as manufacturers,
distributors and involved in marketing of the infringing products, are also
held to be liable. Thus, in the facts of the case, it would be appropriate to
grant damages and cost in the present matter.
75. Furthermore, this Court has time and again reiterated and granted
damages in cases of both passing off and infringement. Thus, this Court in
the case of Koninlijke Philips N.V. and Another Versus Amazestore and
Others, 2019 SCC OnLine Del 8198, provided a rule of thumb that should
be followed while granting damages. Further, the Court in this case granted
compensatory and aggravated damages in view of the defendants violating
the order of the Court and the rights of the plaintiff, and accordingly held as
follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
PLAINTIFFS ARE ENTITLED TO COMPENSATORY DAMAGES
26. A Coordinate Bench of this Court in Inter Ikea Systems

B.V. v. Sham Murari, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 11221 has awarded
compensatory damages in favour of the Plaintiffs, after considering
the principles enshrined in Hindustan Unilever (supra) in the
following terms:—
―24. In the present case, the Plaintiffs do not claim direct
damages on account of any actual losses suffered by them. The
losses claimed by the Plaintiffs are intangible loss, dilution,
loss of confidence and trust of customers and exemplary
damages due to disregard of the principle of fair trading.
Under Section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, damages
can be both direct and indirect. However, the nature of
damages claimed in the present case, are for violation of
trademark rights. While this Court does not wish to encourage
any party, which misleads the trademark authorities, the
question is whether a false affidavit filed before the trademark
office can by itself form the basis of grant of exemplary
damages. The documents placed on record point to the fact that
the Defendants had actually registered the domain name
www.ikeaindustries.com only on 7th May, 2014. The Defendant
No. 3 firm was formed on 2nd May, 2014 and the VAT
registration was obtained on 11th September, 2014. Clearly, the
user claimed by the Plaintiffs in its trademark application filed
by Defendant No. 4, Shilpa Metal Industries was completely
incorrect. Thus as on the date when the ex-parte injunction was
granted, i.e., 22nd December, 2014, the Defendants may have
merely used the mark for a few months. Thus, on the basis of the
inventory prepared by the Local Commissioner, which
according to the Plaintiffs is worth Rs. 67,44,800/- and
according to the Defendants is worth approximately Rs.
25,00,000/-, the Court takes the value of the said products to be
in the range of Rs. 25 lakhs to Rs. 30 lakhs, as the said products
were not sold. Even treating the said stock to be the stock of one
month, the total turnover of the Defendants for three months
from September to December 2014, could not have been more
than Rs. 1 crore. This is a rough and ready estimate on the basis
of the seizure made. Since the Defendants would have had to sell
these products with proper dealer/retailer margins, the profit is
estimated at 15% of the total value of the products, which comes
to about Rs. 15 lakhs. In view of the tests laid down in Rookes
and Cassell, the present is not a case for award of punitive
damages.

25. The Defendants' conduct has been far from bonafide. The
manner in which misleading statements have been made and a
false affidavit has been filed before the trademark registry also
calls for the award of exemplary costs, as the trademark
authority is a quasi-judicial authority and any party filing an
affidavit before the said authority should do so with a complete
sense of responsibility. Under the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of
High Courts Act, 2015 read with the Delhi High Court
(Original Side) Rules, 2018, actual costs can be awarded to the
party. The cost sheet has been placed on record by the Plaintiff.
This Court is of the opinion that costs of Rs. 10 lakhs are liable
to be imposed upon the Defendants. Half of the said sum would
be paid to the Plaintiff and the other half shall be deposited in
favour of the ‗Controller General of Patents, Designs and Trade
marks'. The amount of Rs. 5 lakhs shall be retained in a fund by
the Controller General and shall be utilised for providing legal
assistance for those trade mark applicants and patent applicants
who require legal aid or assistance for paying official fees or
other fees.
26. The suit is thus decreed for damages of Rs. 15,00,000/- and
costs of Rs. 10,00,000/-. Out of the cost of Rs. 10,00,000/-, Rs.
5,00,000/- would be payable to the Plaintiffs. Remaining amount
of Rs. 5,00,000/- shall be deposited with the Controller General
of Patents, Designs and Trademarks. Thus the Plaintiffs are
entitled to a sum of Rs. 20,00,000/- towards general damages
and costs.‖
xxx xxx xxx
29. As the Defendants have wilfully and repeatedly infringed the
Plaintiffs' rights as vested in their copyright, trade dress and design,
the Plaintiffs are entitled to an award of compensatory damages to
the extent of Rs. 69,96,000/- payable by M/s. Omni Exim Private
Limited and Rs. 1,45,75,000/- which is to be paid jointly and
severally by M/s. Nova Manufacturing Industries Limited (NOVA) and
M/s. Badri Electro Supply and Trading Company (BESTCO) LLC.
PLAINTIFFS ARE ALSO ENTITLED TO
AGGRAVATED/EXEMPLARY DAMAGES
30. This Court is of the opinion that the degree of misconduct by
Defendants in a civil suit is often determinative of the nature of

relief to be granted by a Court to the Plaintiffs. The law is wellsettled that the degree of mala fide conduct has a direct impact on
the quantum and nature of damages that could be awarded in
addition to a claim for actual/compensatory damages.
31. The Hindustan Unilever Limited (supra) judgment relied upon by
learned counsel for Plaintiffs with regard to punitive and aggravated
damages in turn relies on the decisions of the House of Lords
in Rookes v. Barnard, (1964) 1 All ER 367 and Cassell & Co.
Ltd. v. Broome, [1972] A.C. 1027 as is apparent from the following
extract reproduced hereinbelow:—
―65. As far as punitive damages are concerned, the learned
Single Judge relied in Lokesh Srivastava and certain other
rulings. Here, since the Court is dealing with a final decree -
and a contested one at that (unlike in the case of trademark
and intellectual property cases, where the courts, especially a
large number of Single Judge decisions proceeded to grant
such punitive damages in the absence of any award of
general or quantified damages for infringement or passing
off), it would be necessary to examine and re-state the
governing principles.
66. Rookes v. Barnard, (1964) 1 All ER 367, is the seminal
authority of the House of Lords, on the issue of when punitive
or exemplary (or sometimes alluded to as ―aggravated‖)
damages can be granted….‖
The later decision in Cassell & Co. Ltd. v. Broome, [1972]
A.C. 1027, upheld the categories for which exemplary
damages could be awarded, but made important clarificatory
observations……‖
 (emphasis supplied)
32. The House of Lords in Rookes v. Barnard (supra) defines three
categories of cases in which punitive/exemplary damages might be
awarded as under:—
a. Oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional action by the
servants of the government;
b. Wrongful conduct by the defendant which has been calculated
by him to make profit for himself which may well exceed the
compensation payable to the claimant; and

c. Any case where exemplary damages are authorized by the
statute.
 (emphasis supplied)‖
 xxx xxx xxx
35. The present cases clearly satisfy all these conditions, as is evident
from the following:
(i) It is clear that the Plaintiffs are the victims of the
Defendants' unlawful activities since not only have their
statutory rights been violated, but they have also suffered loss
of goodwill and reputation at the hands of the Defendants;
(ii) The evidence in the present proceedings clearly showcases
the high profits enjoyed by the Defendants on the sale of
infringing trimmers, and those figures need to be taken into
consideration while quantifying aggravated damages.
 xxx xxx xxx
41. Keeping in view the aforesaid, this Court is of the view that the
rule of thumb that should be followed while granting damages can
be summarised in a chart as under:—
42. It is clarified that the above chart is illustrative and is not to be
read as a statutory provision. The Courts are free to deviate from the
same for good reason.
43. In the present suits, the activities of the Defendants warrant the
payment of aggravated damages in favour of the Plaintiffs. Not only
is M/s. Nova Manufacturing Industries Limited (NOVA), a

subsidiary of M/s. Badri Electro Supply and Trading Company
(BESTCO) LLC., in contempt of the injunction order, but the said
Defendants have also deliberately changed their modus
operandi and routed the impugned products through M/s. Omni
Exim Private Limited. In fact, M/s. Omni Exim Private Limited's
activities furthered the contemptuous acts of M/s. Badri Electro
Supply and Trading Company (BESTCO) LLC. as well as M/s. Nova
Manufacturing Industries Limited (NOVA). The mala fide actions
of the Defendants prove that they fall in the last category in the
chart hereinabove, and that compensatory damage is inadequate to
punish the Defendants for their outrageous conduct and therefore to
deter them from repeating it, the Court awards some larger sum, i.e.
aggravated/exemplary damages.
44. Accordingly, this Court is of the view that the actions of the
Defendants merit an award of aggravated damages. M/s. Nova
Manufacturing Industries Limited (NOVA) and M/s. Badri Electro
Supply and Trading Company (BESTCO) LLC. are directed to pay
additionally Rs. 50 lakhs jointly and severally. M/s. Omni Exim
Private Limited is directed to pay additionally Rs. 50 lakhs.
45. Consequently, the Plaintiffs are held entitled to decree in terms
of paragraph 50(i) of the plaint in CS(COMM) 1170/2016 as well as
paragraph 49(i) of the plaint in CS(COMM) 737/2016. The
Plaintiffs are also held entitled to a decree of Rs. 1,19,96,000/- (Rs.
69,96,000/- + Rs. 50,00,000/-) against M/s. Omni Exim Private
Limited and Rs. 1,95,75,000/- (Rs. 1,45,75,000/- + Rs. 50,00,000/-
) jointly and severally against M/s. Nova Manufacturing Industries
Limited (NOVA) and M/s. Badri Electro Supply and Trading
Company (BESTCO) LLC. The Plaintiffs are further held entitled to
actual costs of litigation including lawyer's fees. The Plaintiffs are
given liberty to file on record the exact cost incurred by them in
adjudication of the present suit. Registry is directed to prepare
decree sheets accordingly.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
76. In the context of a Court proceeding under Order VIII Rule 10 CPC,
while granting punitive damages, wherein, the defendants were held to have
infringed the marks of the plaintiff, along with committing the tort of
passing off, this Court in the case of Nirog Pharma Pvt. Ltd. Versus Umesh

Gupta & Anr., 2016 SCC OnLine Del 5961, held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
22. Having held that the defendants have infringed the registered
trademarks of the plaintiff as well as committed the tort of passing
off, the only other issue which remains in the present suit is
damages.
23. A coordinate bench of this court in the case of Relaxo Rubber
Limited v. Selection Footwear, AIR 2000 Del 60 which while
granting injunction also granted damages under Order VIII Rule 10
in a case for infringement of copyright and trade mark.
24. With regard to the relief of damages as claimed by the plaintiffs in
paragraph 26(h) of the plaint, the plaintiffs relied in Time
Incorporated v. Lokesh Srivastava, 2005 (30) PTC 3 (Del) : 2005
(116) DLT 599, while awarding punitive damages of Rs. 5 lakhs in
addition to compensatory damages also of Rs. 5 lakhs, Justice R.C.
Chopra observed as under:
―8. This Court has no hesitation on saying that the time has
come when the Courts dealing actions for infringement of
trade marks, copy rights, patents etc. should not only grant
compensatory damages but award punitive damages also with
a view to discourage and dishearten law-breakers who indulge
in violations with impunity out of lust for money so that they
realise that in case they are caught, they would be liable not
only to reimburse the aggrieved party but would be liable to
pay punitive damages also, which may spell financial disaster
for them. In Mathias v. Accor Economy Lodging Inc., 347
F.3d 672 (7th Cir. 2003) the factors underlying the grant of
punitive damages were discussed and it was observed that one
function of punitive damages is to relieve the pressure on an
overloaded system of criminal justice by providing a civil
alternative to criminal prosecution of minor crimes. It was
further observed that the award of punitive damages serves the
additional purpose of limiting the defendant's ability to profit
from its fraud by escaping detection and prosecution. If a
torfeasor is caught only half the time he commits torts, then
when he is caught he should be punished twice as heavily in
order to make up for the times he gets away. This Court feels
that this approach is necessitated further for the reason that it is
very difficult for a plaintiff to give proof of actual damages
suffered by him as the defendants who indulge in such activities
never maintain proper accounts of their transactions since they

know that the same are objectionable and unlawful. In the
present case, the claim of punitive damages is of Rs. 5 lacs only
which can be safely awarded. Had it been higher even, this
Court would not have hesitated in awarding the same. This
Court is of the view that the punitive damages should be really
punitive and not flea bite and quantum thereof should depend
upon the flagrancy of infringement.‖
xxx xxx xxx
28. The present suit is also a commercial suit within the definition of
the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015 and it was the clear
intention of the legislature that such cases should be decided
expeditiously and should not be allowed to linger on. Accordingly, if
the defendant fails to persue his case or does so in a lackadaisical
manner by not filing his written statement, the courts should invoke
the provisions of Order VIII Rule 10 to decree such cases.
29. Resultantly, having been satisfied with the averments made and
duly supported by documents, report of the local commissioner and
no written statement being on record, I deem it a fit case to for
invoking the provisions of Order VIII Rule 10 of the Code of Civil
Procedure.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
77. Therefore, at this stage, this Court whilst keeping in view that the
marks and trade dress/packaging are infringing and passing off the marks
and trade dress/packaging of the plaintiff, along with the aspect of violation
of the injunction order dated 07th December, 2023, will proceed to determine
the liability of the defendants.
78. To ascertain the liability and to assess the damages, this Court will
keep into account the judgement of Koninlijke Philips N.V. and Another
(Supra), and the present factual matrix. Thus, the relevant factors applicable
in the instant case, are as follows:
i. The number of products bearing the infringing marks/trade dress,

found at the premises of the respective defendants.
ii. The value of the products bearing the infringing marks/trade dress,
found at the premises of the respective defendants.
iii. The invoices or any other proof showing business activity in relation
to the infringing marks/trade dress, found at the premises of the
respective defendants.
iv. The severity of the malafide conduct on part of the defendants.
79. Before proceeding to rely upon the evidence collected by the Local
Commissioners to assess damages based on the factors aforementioned, this
Court reiterates that, it is settled law that, the Court can take into
consideration the reports of the Local Commissioners to ascertain/assess the
quantum of damages, as the suit and the averments thereof, remain
unrebutted. Thus, this Court in the case of Puma Se Versus Ashok Kumar,
2023 SCC OnLine Del 6764, held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
23. In view of Order 26 Rule 10(2) CPC and the judgments discussed
above, the settled legal position that emerges is that the report of the
Local Commissioner can be treated as evidence in the suit where it is
not challenged by any party. Accordingly, in the present case the
report of the Local Commissioner and the contents therein can be
relied upon by the Court as evidence to assess the damages, as the
same stands unchallenged.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
80. This Court notes that the defendants have deliberately flouted the
injunction order of this Court and continued to conduct business activity
along with violation of the rights of the plaintiff. Thus, in view of the
principles underscored in Koninlijke Philips N.V. and Another (Supra), a

proportionate award in the present case would be to grant an injunction,
costs, aggravated damages (compensatory + additional damages).
81. Thus, holding that punitive damages are aimed at deterring a wrong
doer and the like minded from indulging in unlawful activities, this Court in
the case of Hindustan Lever Ltd. & Anr. Versus Satish Kumar, 2012 SCC
OnLine Del 1378, held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
22. As regards the prayer for cost, rendition of accounts and damages
which includes loss of business, reputation and goodwill in the market,
since, the above claimed amount is based on the assessments made by the
plaintiffs, I am of the view that a sum of Rs. 10 lac can be reasonably
awarded to the plaintiffs as punitive damages in view of the judgment
passed in the case titled as Time Incorporated v. Lokesh Srivastava, 2005
(30) PTC 3(Del.), wherein, this Court expressly recognized a third type of
damages as punitive damages, apart from compensatory and nominal
damages. The Court has made some relevant observations discussion on
the aspect of punitive damages. It was observed:—
―The award of compensatory damages to a plaintiff is aimed at
compensating him for the loss suffered by him whereas punitive
damages are aimed at deterring a wrong doer and the like
minded from indulging in such unlawful activities…‖
―This Court has no hesitation in saying that the time has come
when the Courts dealing actions for infringement of trademark,
copy rights, patents etc. should not only grant compensatory
damages but award punitive damages also with a view to
discourage and dishearten law breakers who indulge in
violations with impunity out of lust for money so that they realize
that in case they are caught, they would be liable not only to
reimburse the aggrieved party but would be liable to pay punitive
damages also, which may spell financial disaster for them.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
82. At this stage, this Court takes note of the total number of infringing
products/goods, based upon the findings of the Local Commissioners, that
were found at the premises of the defendants and is relevant for the

assessment of damages. A table indicating the number of infringing goods
found at the premises of the defendants, is as under:
S.No. Relevant
Defendant
Number of Goods Total
(Tetra
packs)
1. Defendant no. 1 ElectroORS Apple Fruit Drink packs =
12,814
12,814
2. Defendant nos.
2 to 5
i. ERSI Apple Drink packs = 1,61,640
ii. ElectroORS Apple Drink packs = 27,000
iii.CRSI Orange Drink packs = 66,630
2,55,270
3. Defendant no. 6 ERSI Apple & Orange Drink packs =
31,560
31,560
4. Defendant no. 7 i. 293 boxes with 60 packs each = 17,580
ii. 28 boxes with 30 packs each = 840
iii.ElectroORS Drink packs = 8
18,428
5. Defendant no. 8 2000 boxes with 60 packs each = 1,20,000 1,20,000
FINAL TOTAL 4,38,072
83. This Court also notes that at the premises of defendant nos. 2 to 5,
packaging material bearing the impugned marks were found which had the
capacity of packing 20,03,187 tetra packs.
84. At this juncture, this Court takes note of the invoice dated 31st
January, 2024, for the sale of ElectroORS by defendant no. 1 to defendant
no. 8 for the price per piece as Rs. 12.50/-, and the invoice dated 05th
January, 2024 between defendant nos. 6 and 7, for sale of ElectroORS for a
price per piece as Rs. 11.52/- and Rs. 13.96/- for sale of ERSI Apple drink.
It is also noted that all the products sold under the infringing marks have an
„M.R.P.‟ of Rs. 40/-. Therefore, it would be in fitness of things if an average
price of Rs. 12/- is taken for the purposes of calculation of damages.
85. Considering the aforesaid capacity of infringing products found, i.e.,
4,38,072, multiplied by Rs. 12/-, the amount arrived at would be Rs.

52,56,864/-. Therefore, an amount of Rs. 52,56,864/- (Rupees Fifty-Two
Lacs Fifty-Six Thousand Eight Hundred and Sixty-Four) is the considerate
amount of compensatory damages, that are hereby granted in favor of the
plaintiff and against defendant no. 1.
86. Further, as noted above and in accordance with the principles put
forth in Koninlijke Philips N.V. and Another (Supra), the present is a fit
case to grant punitive damages, as the defendants are liable for violating the
injunction order of this Court. Therefore, punitive damages to the tune of Rs.
50,00,000/- (Rupees Fifty Lacs) are granted in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendant no.1.
87. Further, on account of the discussion hereinabove, costs/damages are
levied upon the other defendants, in the following manner:
i. Defendant nos. 2 to 5: Rs. 15,00,000/- (Rupees Fifteen Lacs)
ii. Defendant no. 6: Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lac)
iii. Defendant no.7: Rs. 1,50,000/- (Rupees One Lac Fifty Thousand)
iv. Defendant no.8: Rs. 1,50,000/- (Rupees One Lac Fifty Thousand)
Conclusion:
88. In view of the detailed discussion hereinabove, a decree of permanent
and mandatory injunction is passed in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendants, in terms of prayer clauses A (i), (ii), B (ii), (iii), (iv) and D of the
suit.
89.1 As noted above, compensatory damages to the tune of Rs. 52,56,864/-
(Rupees Fifty-Two Lacs Fifty-Six Thousand Eight Hundred and Sixty-Four)
is awarded in favor of the plaintiff, to be paid by defendant no. 1.
89.2 Further, punitive damages of Rs. 50,00,000/- (Rupees Fifty Lacs) is

awarded in favor of the plaintiff and against the defendant no.1.
89.3 Further, damages of Rs. 15,00,000/- (Rupees Fifteen Lacs) is awarded
in favour of the plaintiff and against defendant nos. 2 to 5.
89.4 Further, damages of Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lac) is awarded in
favour of the plaintiff and against defendant no. 6.
89.5 Further, damages of Rs. 1,50,000/- (Rupees One Lac Fifty Thousand)
is awarded in favour of the plaintiff and against defendant no. 7.
89.6 Further, damages of Rs. 1,50,000/- (Rupees One Lac Fifty Thousand)
is awarded in favour of the plaintiff and against defendant no. 8.
90. The plaintiff is also held entitled to actual costs of litigation, in terms
of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 and Delhi High Court (Original Side)
Rules, 2018, read with IPD Rules, recoverable from defendant no.1. The
plaintiff shall file its bill of costs in terms of Rule 5 of Chapter XXIII of the
Delhi High Court (Original Side) Rules, 2018, within a period of two
months from today. As and when the same is filed, the matter will be listed
before the Taxing Officer for Computation of costs.
91. The suit is decreed in the aforesaid terms. Decree sheet be drawn up.
92. Accordingly, the present suit, along with the pending applications,
stands disposed of.