COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: ARB.P. 2132/2024 & I.A. 49580/2024
DATE: 2024-05-12
PLAINTIFF: GLOCAL THINKERS PVT LTD 
DEFENDANT: INSTRUMENTATION AUTOMATION SURVEILLANCE COMMUNICATION SECTOR SKILL COUNCIL
JUDGE: Justice PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR KAURAV

----JUDGMENT-----

The present petition has been filed under Section 11 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 (the Act), seeking appointment of an Arbitrator
to adjudicate upon the disputes that have arisen between the parties.
2. The dispute has arisen with respect to the Memorandum of
Understanding dated 05.02.2020. It is stated that the petitioner received
work orders from the respondent for online assessment, IT, and facilitation
services, and after raising invoices, an amount of ₹39,18,840/- remained
outstanding as of 22.07.2021. Despite repeated reminders, it is stated that the
respondent failed to clear the dues, leading the petitioner to file Commercial
Suit No. 25/2023 before the District Court, Gurugram for recovery of
₹18,18,600/- with 12% interest. It further stated that in the suit, the
respondent entered appearance and filed an application under Section 8 of
the Act, and the same was allowed on 05.10.2023. The petitioner submits
that despite raising the invoices, the full and final payment has not been paid
by the respondent; therefore, it has filed the present petition.
3. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent has raised
various objections.
4. However, it is seen that Clause 18(iv) provides for arbitration in
accordance with the Act, which is extracted as under:
―18. Other Conditions
iv) In case of any dispute between the Parties under this Agreement with
regard to interpretation or as to rights, duties or liabilities there under or
otherwise the Parties will endeavour to resolve the matter through mutual
negotiations . in case the dispute remains unresolved Jar a period of
Thirty (30) days, the parties may refer the dispute to a sole Arbitrator to
be mutually decided between the Parties under the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996,. The place of arbitration shall be at New Delhi and
the language arbitration shall be in English, the governing law of this
Agreement shall be laws of India and the Courts of New Delhi shall have
the exclusive jurisdiction to deal with this Agreement‖
5. The law with respect to the scope and standard of judicial scrutiny
under Section 11(6) of the Act is no longer res integra. This Court in
Pradhaan Air Express Pvt Ltd v. Air Works India Engineering Pvt Ltd1
,
has extensively dealt with the scope of interference at the stage of Section
11. Furthermore, in Axis Finance Limited Vs. Mr. Agam Ishwar Trimbak,2
this Court has held that the scope of inquiry under Section 11 of the Act is
limited to a prima facie examination of the existence of an arbitration

1
2025 SCC OnLine Del 3022
2
2025:DHC:7477
agreement. Further, it was also reiterated that objections relating to the
arbitrability of disputes are not to be entertained by a referral Court acting
under Section 8 or 11 of the Act. The relevant extract of the aforesaid
decision reads as under:-
19.In In Re: Interplay , the Supreme Court confined the analysis under
Section 11 of the Act to the existence of an arbitration agreement and
under Section 8 of the Act to the existence and validity of an arbitration
agreement. Under both the provisions, examination was to be made at
the touchstone of Section 7 of the Act. Further, issues pertaining to the
arbitrability of the dispute fell outside the scope of both Section 11(6A)
and Section 8 of the Act. The material part of the judgement of the
Supreme Court in In Re: Interplay reads as under:
164. The 2015 Amendment Act has laid down different
parameters for judicial review under Section 8 and Section 11.
Where Section 8 requires the referral Court to look into the prima
facie existence of a valid arbitration agreement. Section 11
confines the Court’s jurisdiction to the examination of the
existence of an arbitration agreement. Although the object and
purpose behind both Sections 8 and 11 is to compel parties to
abide by their contractual understanding, the scope of power of
the referral Courts under the said provisions is intended to be
different. The same is also evident from the fact that Section 37 of
the Arbitration Act allows an appeal from the order of an arbitral
tribunal refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under Section
8, but not from Section 11. Thus, the 2015 Amendment Act has
legislatively overruled the dictum of Patel Engineering (supra)
where it was held that Section 8 and Section 11 are
complementary in nature. Accordingly, the two provisions cannot
be read as laying down a similar standard. 165. The legislature
confined the scope of reference under Section 11(6A) to the
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement. The use
of the term ―examination‖ in itself connotes that the scope of the
power is limited to a prima facie determination. Since the
Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the requirement of
―existence‖ of an arbitration agreement draws effect from
Section 7 of the Arbitration Act. In Duro Felguera (supra), this
Court held that the referral Courts only need to consider one
aspect to determine the existence of an arbitration agreement –
whether the underlying contract contains an arbitration
agreement which provides for arbitration pertaining to the
disputes which have arisen between the parties to the agreement.
Therefore, the scope of examination under Section 11(6A) should
be confined to the existence of an arbitration agreement on the
basis of Section 7Similarly, the validity of an arbitration
agreement, in view of Section 7, should be restricted to the
requirement of formal validity such as the requirement that the
agreement be in writing. This interpretation also gives true effect
to the doctrine of competence-competence by leaving the issue of
substantive existence and validity of an arbitration agreement to
be decided by arbitral tribunal under Section 16. We accordingly
clarify the position of law laid down in Vidya Drolia (supra) in
the context of Section 8 and Section 11 of the Arbitration Act.
166. The burden of proving the existence of arbitration
agreement generally lies on the party seeking to rely on such
agreement. In jurisdictions such as India, which accept the
doctrine of competencecompetence, only prima facie proof of the
existence of an arbitration agreement must be adduced before the
referral Court. The referral Court is not the appropriate forum to
conduct a minitrial by allowing the parties to adduce the
evidence in regard to the existence or validity of an arbitration
agreement. The determination of the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement on the basis of evidence ought to be left to
the arbitral tribunal. This position of law can also be gauged
from the plain language of the statute. 167. Section 11(6A) uses
the expression ―examination of the existence of an arbitration
agreement.‖ The purport of using the word ―examination‖
connotes that the legislature intends that the referral Court has to
inspect or scrutinize the dealings between the parties for the
existence of an arbitration agreement. Moreover, the expression
―examination‖ does not connote or imply a laborious or
contested inquiry. On the other hand, Section 16 provides that the
arbitral tribunal can ―rule‖ on its jurisdiction, including the
existence and validity of an arbitration agreement. A ―ruling‖
connotes adjudication of disputes after admitting evidence from
the parties. Therefore, it is evident that the referral Court is only
required to examine the existence of arbitration agreements,
whereas the arbitral tribunal ought to rule on its jurisdiction,
including the issues pertaining to the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement. A similar view was adopted by this Court
in Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd.‖ [Emphasis
supplied]
20. The effect of In Re: Interplay was further explained by a Three Judge
Bench of the Supreme Court in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish
Spinning3
wherein the Court declared Vidya Drolia and NTPC Ltd.’s
findings qua scope of inquiry under Section 8 and Section 11 of the Act to
no longer be compatible with modern principles of arbitration. The
material portions of the judgement read as under:
―114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re :
Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of enquiry at the stage
of appointment of arbitrator is limited to the scrutiny of prima
facie existence of the arbitration agreement, and nothing else.
For this reason, we find it difficult to hold that the observations
made in Vidya Drolia (supra) and adopted in NTPC v. SPML
(supra) that the jurisdiction of the referral Court when dealing
with the issue of ―accord and satisfaction‖ under Section 11
extends to weeding out ex-facie non-arbitrable and frivolous
disputes would continue to apply despite the subsequent decision
in In Re : Interplay (supra). … 118. Tests like the ―eye of the
needle‖ and ―ex-facie meritless‖, although try to minimise the
extent of judicial interference, yet they require the referral Court
to examine contested facts and appreciate prima facie evidence
(however limited the scope of enquiry may be) and thus are not in
conformity with the principles of modern arbitration which place
arbitral autonomy and judicial non-interference on the highest
pedestal.‖ [Emphasis supplied]
21. Similarly, in BGM and M-RPL-JMCT (JV) v. Eastern Coalfields Ltd4
the Supreme Court succinctly explained the effect of In Re: Interplay on a
Referral Court’s powers under Section 11 of the Act. The relevant part of
the judgement is as under:
15. …
(a) Section 11 confines the Court's jurisdiction to the examination
regarding the existence of an arbitration agreement.
(b) The use of the term ―examination‖ in itself connotes that the
scope of the power is limited to a prima facie determination.
(c) Referral Courts only need to consider one aspect to
determine the existence of an arbitration agreement — whether
the underlying contract contains an arbitration agreement which
provides for arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have
arisen between the parties to the agreement. Therefore, the scope
of examination under Section 11(6-A) should be confined to the
existence of an arbitration agreement on the basis of Section 7.
Such a legal approach will help the Referral Court in weeding

3
2024 SCC OnLine SC 1754
4
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1471
out prima facie non-existent arbitration agreements.
(d) The purport of using the word ―examination‖ connotes that
the legislature intends that the Referral Court has to inspect or
scrutinise the dealings between the parties for the existence of an
arbitration agreement. However, the expression ―examination‖
does not connote or imply a laborious or contested inquiry.
(e) The burden of proving the existence of arbitration agreement
generally lies on the party seeking to rely on such agreement.
Only prima facie proof of the existence of an arbitration
agreement must be adduced before the Referral Court. The
Referral Court is not the appropriate forum to conduct a minitrial by allowing the parties to adduce the evidence in regard to
the existence or validity of an arbitration agreement. The
determination of the existence and validity of an arbitration
agreement on the basis of evidence ought to be left to the Arbitral
Tribunal.
(f) Section 16 provides that the Arbitral Tribunal can ―rule‖ on
its jurisdiction, including the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement. A ―ruling‖ connotes adjudication of
disputes after admitting evidence from the parties. Therefore,
when the Referral Court renders a prima facie opinion, neither
the Arbitral Tribunal, nor the Court enforcing the arbitral award
is bound by such a prima facie view. If a prima facie view as to
the existence of an arbitration agreement is taken by the Referral
Court, it still allows the Arbitral Tribunal to examine the issue in
depth.
[Emphasis supplied]
22. Thus from the above-mentioned authorities it is clear that a Court’s
scope of inquiry under Section 11 of the Act has been limited to a prima
facie examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement while the
adjudication under Section 8 is to be made for both existence and
validity. Further, the examination so undertaken under both the said
provisions must be within the confines of Section 7 of the Act. Objections
relating to arbitrability of disputes are not to be entertained by a referral
Court acting under Section 8 or 11 of the Act.‖
6. Considering that disputes have arisen between the parties and there is
an arbitration clause in the contract, there is no impediment in the
appointment of a Sole Arbitrator, reserving the right of the respondent to
raise all objections therein.
7. Accordingly, Ms. Anshika Saxena, Advocate (Mobile No. +91
8377944021, e-mail id: anshikasaxena499@gmail.com ), is appointed as the
Sole Arbitrator.
8. The arbitration would take place under the aegis of the Delhi
International Arbitration Centre (DIAC) and in terms of its rules and
regulations. The Sole Arbitrator shall be entitled to fees as per the Schedule
of Fees maintained by the DIAC.
9. The Sole Arbitrator is also requested to file the requisite disclosure
under Section 12 (2) of the Act within a week of entering on reference.
10. All rights and contentions of the parties in relation to the
claims/counter-claims are kept open, to be decided by the Sole Arbitrator on
their merits, in accordance with law.
11. Needless to say, nothing in this order shall be construed as an
expression of opinion of this Court on the merits of the controversy between
the parties. Let a copy of the instant order be sent to the Sole Arbitrator
through electronic mode as well.
12. Accordingly, the instant petition stands disposed of.
