COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: FAO (COMM) 247/2024
DATE: 22.12.2025
PLAINTIFF: HARISH MITTAL 
DEFENDANT: KISHAN GOPAL RATHI 
JUDGE: Justice TUSHAR RAO GEDELA

----JUDGMENT----

1. The present appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 19961
read with Section 13 of the Commercial
Courts Act, 2015 challenges the Order dated 20.07.20242
passed by
the learned District Judge (Comm), South East, Saket Courts3
,
Delhi, in CS (Comm) No.166/2024 titled as‘M/s Nishant Promoters
Pvt. Ltd. vs. M/s Electro Mech Engineerand Ors.’.

1 The Act
2
Impugned Order
3
learned District Judge
BRIEF FACTS:
2. The Appellant herein is a partnership firm and engaged in
fabrication and erection work. The Respondent herein is a company
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013, and is engaged in a
similar line of business.
3. The parties came into contact through their involvement in the
execution of certain structural works at Jamuria Industrial Area,
Bardhaman, West Bengal, for which the Appellant had received a
work order dated 15.11.2022 from one M/s Gridhan Metal Pvt.
Ltd.4
. In furtherance of the same, vide e-mail dated 20.12.2022, the
Appellant-contractor, engaged the Respondent as a sub-contractor for
undertaking the specified on-site activities forming part of the said
work order.
4. During the subsistence of this arrangement, various e-mail
communications were exchanged as between the parties and, on
occasion, with GMPL, with regard to the said work order and the
terms and conditions that governed such work between the Appellant
and GMPL, and the parties herein. Of particular significance are
e-mails dated 19.10.2022 and 19.12.2022, as it is alleged by the
Appellant that they disclose the terms and conditions which regulate
the contract between the parties herein, which is disputed by the
Respondent.
5. The Respondent executed the works and raised invoices against
the Appellant totalling to Rs. 72,47,805/-, of which Rs. 44,77,939/-
was paid. The balance of Rs. 29,82,953/- remained unpaid. In view of
the non-payment, the Appellant issued a legal notice dated 16.09.2023
to the Respondent, claiming the outstanding sum. The Respondent

4 GMPL
acknowledged receipt of the said notice with a reply dated 10.10.2023
through WhatsApp, but did not make payment of the said dues.
6. Subsequently, the Respondent filed a commercial suit being CS
(COMM) No. 166/2024, seeking recovery of Rs. 29,82,953/- along
with pendente lite and interest. In the said suit, the Appellant filed an
application under Section 8 of the Act, seeking reference of the
dispute to arbitration, along with a written statement, an application
for condonation of delay under Order VIII Rule 10 Code of Civil
Procedure, 19085
, and reply under Order XXXVIII Rule 5 CPC.
However, by order dated 01.06.2024, the learned District Judge
dismissed the application under Order VIII Rule 10 CPC as the same
was not pressed for by the Appellant herein.
7. With reference to application filed under Section 8 of the Act,
by the order impugned herein, the learned District Judge rejected the
Appellant’s application, on the ground that the arbitration clause
sought to be invoked in the present case is enshrined in a contract as
between GMPL and the Appellant, and since there is no privity of the
terms in the said contract with the Respondent herein, therefore, the
said clause could not be extended for the purpose of resolution of a
dispute between the Appellant and the Respondent herein.
8. Aggrieved by the said impugned order, the Appellant has
preferred the present appeal before this Court.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANT:
9. The learned counsel for the Appellant would draw our attention
to the communication dated 06.07.2023, from the Respondent to the
said GMPL, which states as under:

5 CPC
“We would like to bring to your notice that we have been working
at your organisation M/s Gridhan Metal Pvt. Ltd. (GMPL).
Jamuriasite on your 900 TPD DRI project under sub-contract of
M/s Electro Mech Engineers according to GMPL terms and
conditions.”
10. He would also seek to rely upon an e-mail dated 15.03.2023
addressed to the Respondent from the Appellant stating therein that
the terms and conditions were on a back to back basis as per GMPL
Work Order No. WJ22D12-002 dated 12.12.2022. He would thus
contend that since there is an express acknowledgement of work being
performed by the Respondent on “GMPL Terms and Conditions”, the
same would operate as a clear indication of the understanding that the
arbitration clause in the agreement as between GMPL and the
Appellant herein would also extend to the relationship as between the
parties herein.
11. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel appearing for
the Appellant would rely upon the Judgment of the learned Single
Judge of this Court in Ms. G. Kapoor vs. M/S Reacon Engineers Pvt.
Ltd.6
. Relying upon this Judgment, he would state that since the
arrangement as between the parties was a back to back arrangement
with the primary understanding being as between GMPL and the
Appellant, the terms of the Appellant’s contract with GMPL and, in
particular, the Arbitration Clause thereof would also be applicable as
between the parties herein. He would further rely upon the Judgment
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in NBCC (India) Limited vs. Zillion
Infraprojects Pvt. Ltd.7
to contend that the Arbitration Clause, by
reference, would have to necessarily be made applicable as between
the parties herein.

6
2019 SCC OnLine Del 10667
7
(2024) 7 SCC 174
CONTENTIONS OF THE RESPONDENT:
12. Per contra, learned counsel for the Respondent would submit
that there was no privity of the contract as between the parties and
mere general reference to the terms and conditions between the
Appellant and GMPL would not per se bind or even be applicable to
the relationship between the Appellant and the Respondent.
13. It is further submitted that the Appellant’s reliance on the
alleged Work Order dated 12.12.2022 (WJ22D12-002), purportedly
issued by GMPL to the Appellant, is untenable, as the existence of
such a document is specifically denied. It is urged that even assuming
such a document to exist, the arbitration clause therein governs only
the relationship between GMPL and the Appellant, and cannot bind
the Respondent, who is neither a signatory nor has ever consented to
arbitrate disputes with the Appellant.
14. It is contended that there was never any intention on the part of
the Respondent to submit to arbitration, and in the absence of any
signed, executed, or otherwise accepted arbitration agreement inter se
the parties, the Appellant cannot compel the Respondent to arbitrate.
The Respondent emphasises that no document has been produced to
demonstrate a conscious acceptance by the Respondent of arbitration
as the dispute resolution mechanism.
15. Learned counsel for the Respondent would contend that the
Appellant has failed to comply with Section 8(2) of the Act, which
requires production of the original arbitration agreement or a duly
certified copy. The documents relied upon by the Appellant are stated
to be mere photocopies, lacking signatures or authentication, and
therefore insufficient to meet the statutory requirement.
16. It is further submitted by the learned counsel for the
Respondent that the Appellant’s conduct indicates that the application
filed under Section 8 of the Act was an afterthought. Reference is
made to the recall of the order dated 01.06.2024, and the Legal Notice
dated 16.09.2023 and the Appellant’s Reply to the same dated
10.10.2023, wherein no arbitration agreement was asserted, to contend
that the plea was introduced belatedly only to avoid the jurisdiction of
the commercial court.
ANALYSIS:
17. We have considered the rival submissions of the parties and,
with their able assistance, perused the relevant records, as well as the
law that has been referred to and relied upon by the parties.
18. At the outset, it would be appropriate to reproduce the analysis
and findings of the learned Commercial Court in the Impugned Order
with respect to the application as under Section 8 of the Act. The
relevant excerpts of the Impugned Order are set out as below:
“The page '45' of the Written Statement is the workorder between
the plaintiff and GMPL and no privity of contract between plaintiff
and defendant is shown. The defendant intends to argue that by
"back to back" application suggested in email at page 34 (referred
above), the intent must be dragged to arbitration clause also.
However, this is a mis-placed submission as no clear consensus for
referring the dispute to an arbitrator can be raised as natural or
obvious inference from the reading. The defendant cannot make
the Court to read between the lines of a contract to seek imposition
upon plaintiff.
The defendant hence has failed to satisfy any of therequisites ofthe
provision, no ground is reflected in the application under Section 8
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, which stands rejected.”
19. The short question, therefore, that arises for this Court’s
consideration is whether in the facts and circumstances of the present
case, the Arbitration Clause that forms part of the Commercial
Agreement/Work Order as between the said GMPL and the Appellant
can, by reference, also be extended to the commercial arrangement as
between the parties herein, meaning thereby that the parties herein
would stand governed by the Arbitration Clause as contained in the
agreement between the GMPL and the Appellant.
20. We are afraid we cannot agree with the contentions of the
Appellant herein. As is apparent, there is absolutely no privity of the
contract as between GMPL and the Respondent herein. In fact, by
their communication dated 07.07.2023, GMPL has clearly disallowed
any subcontractor performing any work and has termed the
Respondent as a third party/sub-contractor.
21. The reliance placed by the Appellant on the communication of
the Respondent with GMPL too does not assist the Appellant since the
said communication was never addressed to the Appellant or
determinative of the relationship as between the parties herein. It is
loosely worded communication adverting to the fact that the
Respondent was performing the work on the contract entered into
between the Appellant and GMPL. This correspondence does not
constitute an unambiguous approval and acceptance of the terms and
conditions of the agreement as between those parties, nor does it
evidence an absolute and concrete acceptance of the settlement of
disputes as between the parties herein, by resort to Arbitration.
22. That said, we advert now to the principal issue that requires our
attention. We refer to the judgment produced by the learned counsel
appearing for the Appellant, namely NBCC (India) Limited vs.
Zillion Infra projects Pvt. Ltd (Surpa), and consider it appropriate to
extract the relevant paragraphs of the same as follows:
“17. It could thus be seen that this Court has held that when the
parties enter into a contract, making a general reference to another
contract, such general reference would not have the effect of
incorporating the arbitration clause from the referred document
into the contract between the parties. It has been held that the
arbitration clause from another contract can be incorporated into
the contract (where such reference is made), only by a specific
reference to arbitration clause. It has further been held that where a
contract between the parties provides that the execution or
performance of that contract shall be in terms of another contract
(which contains the terms and conditions relating to performance
and a provision for settlement of disputes by arbitration), then, the
terms of the referred contract in regard to execution/performance
alone will apply, and not the arbitration agreement in the referred
contract, unless there is special reference to the arbitration clause
also.
18. This Court further held that where the contract provides that
the standard form of terms and conditions of an independent trade
or professional institution will bind them or apply to the contract,
such standard form of terms and conditions including any
provision for arbitration in such standard terms and conditions,
shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference. It has been held
that sometimes the contract may also say that the parties are
familiar with those terms and conditions or that the parties have
read and understood the said terms and conditions. It has also been
held that where the contract between the parties stipulates that the
conditions of contract of one of the parties to the contract shall
form a part of their contract, the arbitration clause forming part of
such general conditions of contract will apply to the contract
between the parties.
19. A perusal of sub-section (5) of Section 7 of the Arbitration Act
itself would reveal that it provides for a conscious acceptance of
the arbitration clause from another document, by the parties, as a
part of their contract, before such arbitration clause could be read
as a part of the contract between the parties.
20. It is thus clear that a reference to the document in the contract
should be such that shows the intention to incorporate the
arbitration clause contained in the document into the contract.
21. The law laid down in M.R. Engineers & Contractors [M.R.
Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd. v. Som Datt Builders Ltd.,
(2009) 7 SCC 696 : (2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 271] has been followed
by this Court in Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port
Ltd. [Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017) 9
SCC 729 : (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] and Elite Engg.
&Construction (Hyd.) (P) Ltd. v. Techtrans Construction India
(P) Ltd. [Elite Engg. & Construction (Hyd.) (P) Ltd. v. Techtrans
Construction India (P) Ltd., (2018) 4 SCC 281 : (2018) 3 SCC
(Civ) 60]
22. No doubt that this Court in Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables
Ltd. [Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables Ltd., (2018) 2 SCC 519 :
(2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 195] has distinguished the law laid down
in M.R. Engineers & Contractors [M.R. Engineers & Contractors
(P) Ltd. v. Som Datt Builders Ltd., (2009) 7 SCC 696 : (2009) 3
SCC (Civ) 271] . In the said case (i.e. Inox Wind [Inox Wind
Ltd. v. Thermocables Ltd., (2018) 2 SCC 519 : (2018) 2 SCC (Civ)
195]), this Court has held that though general reference to an
earlier contract is not sufficient for incorporation of an arbitration
clause in the later contract, a general reference to a standard form
would be enough for incorporation of the arbitration clause.
Though this Court in Inox Wind [Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables
Ltd., (2018) 2 SCC 519 : (2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 195] agrees with the
judgment in M.R. Engineers & Contractors [M.R. Engineers &
Contractors (P) Ltd. v. Som Datt Builders Ltd., (2009) 7 SCC 696 :
(2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 271] , it holds that general reference to a
standard form of contract of one party along with those of trade
associations and professional bodies will be sufficient to
incorporate the arbitration clause. In the said case (i.e. Inox
Wind [Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables Ltd., (2018) 2 SCC 519 :
(2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 195] ), this Court found that the purchase order
was issued by the appellant therein in which it was categorically
mentioned that the supply would be as per the terms mentioned
therein and in the attached standard terms and conditions. The
respondent therein by his letter had confirmed its acceptance. This
Court found that the case before it was a case of a single contract
and not two-contract case and, therefore, held that the arbitration
clause as mentioned in the terms and conditions would be
applicable.
23. The present case is a “two-contract” case and not a “singlecontract” case.
29. As already discussed hereinabove, when there is a reference in
the second contract to the terms and conditions of the first contract,
the arbitration clause would not ipso facto be applicable to the
second contract unless there is a specific mention/reference thereto.
30. We are of the considered view that the present case is not a
case of “incorporation” but a case of “reference”. As such, a
general reference would not have the effect of incorporating the
arbitration clause. In any case, Clause 7.0 of the LoI, which is also
a part of the agreement, makes it amply clear that the redressal of
the dispute between NBCC and the respondent has to be only
through civil courts having jurisdiction of Delhi alone.”
23. As is apparent from a reading of the paragraphs extracted
above, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has, in no uncertain terms, held
that a mere general reference to the terms of another contract cannot,
of and by itself, lead to the incorporation of the Arbitration Clause
from the referred document into the contract/agreement as between
other parties. In fact, as has been succinctly set out in Paragraph
No. 16 of the afore-extracted judgment, the necessary conditions for
coming to a conclusion that the Arbitration Clause would get
incorporated are as follows:
“24. The scope and intent of Section 7(5) of the Act may therefore
be summarised thus—
(i) An arbitration clause in another document, would get
incorporated into a contract by reference, if the following
conditions are fulfilled;
(1) the contract should contain a clear reference to the documents
containing arbitration clause,
(2) the reference to the other document should clearly indicate an
intention to incorporate the arbitration clause into the contract,
(3) the arbitration clause should be appropriate, that is capable of
application in respect of disputes under the contract and should not
be repugnant to any term of the contract.
(ii) When the parties enter into a contract, making a general
reference to another contract, such general reference would not
have the effect of incorporating the arbitration clause from the
referred document into the contract between the parties. The
arbitration clause from another contract can be incorporated into
the contract (where such reference is made), only by a specific
reference to arbitration clause.
(iii) Where a contract between the parties provides that the
execution or performance of that contract shall be in terms of
another contract (which contains the terms and conditions relating
to performance and a provision for settlement of disputes by
arbitration), then, the terms of the referred contract in regard to
execution/performance alone will apply, and not the arbitration
agreement in the referred contract, unless there is special reference
to the arbitration clause also.
(iv) Where the contract provides that the standard form of terms
and conditions of an independent trade or professional institution
(as for example the standard terms and conditions of a trade
association or architects association) will bind them or apply to the
contract, such standard form of terms and conditions including any
provision for arbitration in such standard terms and conditions,
shall be deemed to be incorporated by reference. Sometimes the
contract may also say that the parties are familiar with those terms
and conditions or that the parties have read and understood the said
terms and conditions.
(v) Where the contract between the parties stipulates that the
conditions of contract of one of the parties to the contract shall
form a part of their contract (as for example the general conditions
of contract of the Government where the Government is a party),
the arbitration clause forming part of such general conditions of
contract will apply to the contract between the parties.”
24. Resultantly, unless and until it is found that there is a specific
reference for the purpose of incorporation of the Arbitration Clause
into the present agreement/arrangement as between the parties, it
cannot be held that the Arbitration Clause from the agreement
between GMPL and the Appellant would get extended. This is all the
more, given the statutory need for a consensus ad idem for the purpose
of reference of disputes to arbitration, absent clear expression of
which, by mere implication, a reference to resolution of disputes by
arbitration cannot be imputed.
25. Furthermore, the said Judgment refers to the existence of two
contracts between the same parties and not to a scenario wherein a
contract between two parties could be extended to a rank
outsider/third party. The Judgment in Inox Wind Ltd. v.
Thermocables Ltd.8
too, is clearly distinguishable as it pertains to a
different fact scenario altogether and would not be applicable in the
facts of the present case.
26. As has already been extracted hereinabove, the alleged
admission on the part of the Respondent herein of the extension of the

8
(2018) 2 SCC 519
said Arbitration Clause is clearly nothing but a general reference to
the agreement itself without, in any manner, expressly consenting to
its application to the contract as between the parties herein and is
clearly not in consonance with the scope and intent of Section 7(5) of
the Act.
27. In view of the clear judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
and in the facts and circumstances of the present matter, we are of the
considered view that no interference is required and the present appeal
stands dismissed.
28. The present appeal, along with pending application(s), if any,
disposed of in the above terms.
29. No Order as to costs.