COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: FAO (COMM) 316/2025 and CM APPLs. 69747-748/2025
DATE: 13.11.2025 
PLAINTIFF: PERPETUAL VISION LLP & ANR.	 
DEFENDANT: VAIBHAV S PINGALE & ORS
JUDGE: Justice C. HARI SHANKAR & Justice OM PRAKASH SHUKLA 

----JUDGMENT----

This appeal under Section 13 of the Commercial Courts Act,
2015 is directed against the following order passed by the learned
District Judge (Commercial Court)-01, Saket.
“03.11.2025
Present: Counsel for plaintiff, Sh. Naseem and Sh. Rahul
Singh.
Submission heard. Record perused.
Summons of the suit as well as notice to the application U/o
39 Rule 1 and 2 CPC be issued to the defendants on taking steps
within a week by all permissible modes including electronic mode,
returnable by 19.11.2025. For service to be affected through
electronic mode i.e. Whats App, e-mail address etc. of defendant,
affidavit with regard to correctness of the same, be filed on record.

Further, it be specifically mentioned on the summons that this is a
commercial suit and the defendant is required to file the written
statement alongwith statement of truth and affidavit of admission
and denial of documents within the mandatory period of 30 days of
service.”
2. We have heard Mr. Anshuman Upadhyay, learned counsel for
the appellants at length on whether such an order would be appealable.
3. Mr. Upadhyay has, with all the persuasion at his command,
attempted to convince us that the answer to the query has to be in the
affirmative. He has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme
Court in A. Venkatasubbiah Naidu v S. Chellappan and Ors1
. to
convince us that an order either granting or refusing an application for
interim injunction under Order XXXIX Rules 12
and 23 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, 19084
is relatable to the said provisions and therefore,
an appeal would lie against the said order.
1
(2000) 7 SCC 695
2 1. Cases in which temporary injunction may be granted. — Where in any suit it is proved by
affidavit or otherwise—
(a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or
alienated by any party to the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or
(b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of his property
with a view to [defrauding] his creditors,
[(c) that the defendant threatens to dispossess the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury
to the plaintiff in relation to any property in dispute in the suit,]
the Court may by order grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act, or make such other order
for the purpose of staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, removal or
disposition of the property [or dispossession of the plaintiff, or otherwise causing injury to the
plaintiff in relation to any property in dispute in the suit] as the Court thinks fit, until the disposal of
the suit or until further orders.
3 2. Injunction to restrain repetition or continuance of breach.—
(1) In any suit for restraining the defendant from committing a breach of contract or other
injury of any kind, whether compensation is claimed in the suit or not, the plaintiff may, at any time
after the commencement of the suit, and either before or after judgment, apply to the Court for a
temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from committing the breach of contract or injury
complained of, or any breach of contract or injury of a like kind arising out of the same contract or
relating to the same property or right.
(2) The Court may by order grant such injunction, on such terms as to the duration of the
injunction, keeping an account, giving security, or otherwise, as the Court thinks fit.
4
“CPC”, hereinafter

4. Appeals under Section 13(1-A)5 of the Commercial Courts Act
lie against the orders passed under Section 37 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 19966 or under Order XLIII Rule 1 of the CPC.
5. We are not concerned, in the present case, with the 1996 Act.
6. In order to satisfy us on the maintainability of the present
appeal, therefore, the appellants would have to pigeonhole the order
under challenge within one of the clauses of Order XLIII Rule 1 of the
CPC. Mr. Upadhyay’s contention is that the impugned order is
appealable as it has been passed under Order XLIII Rule 1(r)7 of the
CPC.
7. Order XLIII Rule 1 (r) of the CPC covers orders passed under
Order XXXIX Rules 1, 2, 2A, 4 or 10 of the CPC.
8. Mr. Upadhyay’s contention, predicated, inter alia, on the
judgment of the Supreme court in A. Venkatasubbiah Naidu is that
the impugned order by merely issuing notice on the petitioner’s
application under Order XXXIX of the CPC has, effectively rejected
the petitioner’s prayer for ex parte ad interim relief and that such a
5
(1-A) Any person aggrieved by the judgment or order of a Commercial Court at the level of District Judge
exercising original civil jurisdiction or, as the case may be, Commercial Division of a High Court may appeal
to the Commercial Appellate Division of that High Court within a period of sixty days from the date of the
judgment or order:
Provided that an appeal shall lie from such orders passed by a Commercial Division or a
Commercial Court that are specifically enumerated under Order XLIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(5 of 1908) as amended by this Act and Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of
1996).]
6
“1996 Act”, hereinafter
7 1. Appeals from orders.—An appeal shall lie from the following orders under the provisions of
Section 104, namely:—
*****
(r) an Order under Rule 1, Rule 2, [Rule 2-A], Rule 4 or Rule 10 of Order XXXIX;

rejection would necessarily be relatable to Order XXXIX Rule 1 of the
CPC. Ergo, he submits that the order would be one of the orders
envisaged under Order XLIII Rule 1(r) of the CPC and would,
therefore, be appealable under Section 13 of the Commercial Courts
Act.
9. The issue stands covered against the appellants by the
judgments of Division Benches of this Court in Sahil Singh
Maniktala v Harpreet Singh8
, and Nisha Raj v Pratap K. Kaula9
,
from which the relevant paragraphs may be culled out thus:
From Sahil Singh Maniktala
“7. The grant of a notice in an application for ad interim relief
is covered by provisions of Order 39 Rule 310 CPC. This, however,
is not appealable under Order 43 Rule 1(r) under which an appeal
lies only against an order passed under Order 39 Rule 1, 2, 2A, 4
and Rule 10. Rule 3 is specifically excluded and since no appeal is
provided against an order under this rule, no appeal would
consequently lie against the grant of notice in an ancillary
application seeking temporary injunction.
8. Such an appeal would also not lie under Section 10 of the
Delhi High Court Act, 1966 which provides for an appeal to the
Division Bench of the High Court against any judgment passed by
the learned Single Judge while exercising original jurisdiction
because an order issuing notice could not be said to be a judgment
within the meaning of that word. The word “judgment” as is well
established refers to adjudication which has the concept of finality
attached to it and has also a direct and immediate adverse effect on
the party. Every order, thus, is not a judgment, though there may
be interlocutory orders which may have trappings and
characteristics of a judgment and yet may not be covered by the
provisions of Order 43 Rule (1)(a) to (w).
8 118 (2005) DLT 350 (DB)
9 57 (1995) DLT 490 (DB)
10 3. Before granting injunction, Court to direct notice to opposite party.—The Court shall in all
cases, except where it appears that the object of granting the injunction would be defeated by the
delay, before granting an injunction, direct notice of the application for the same to be given to the
opposite party:

9. An appeal would surely lie against such orders, even
though they are interim and interlocutory in nature and in respect
of which right of appeal is not created under the CPC, because
being a judgment these would be covered under Section 10 of the
Delhi High Court Act. The same would hold good under Letters
Patent also which again provides for the requirement of
“judgment”.”
From Nisha Raj
“5. In the present, case before us we are not, however,
concerned with procedural orders at the trial. We are here
concerned with an interlocutory application under Order 39 Rule 1
CPC by which the property or rights claimed in the suit are sought
to be protected pending suit so that in case the suit is decreed in
favour of the party claiming interim relief, the decree, can be
effective and is not rendered otiose. In other words, matters arising
under Order 39 Rule 1 are not procedural steps, in the trial. The
test here is, as stated in Shah Babulal's case11 [para 112(3)],
whether the order is an ‘intermediary’ or ‘interlucotry judgment’
which affects a valuable right of the property. Before such an order
can be a judgment, the adverse effect on the party must be direct
and immediate, rather than indirect or remote, as stated by the
Supreme Court in the same case.
If that be test laid down by the Supreme Court in Shah Babulal's
case in 1981, the question is whether an order of the trial Judge
ordering ‘notice’ under Order 39 Rule 3 can be a ‘judgment’. A
Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court consisting of
Alladi Kuppuswami (as he then was) and P.A. Choudhary J. held
in Dr. Gouri Shankar v Dy. Commissioner. Municipal
Corporation of Hyderabad12 that an order of the learned Single
Judge ordering ‘notice’ is not a ‘judgment’ under clause 15 of the
Letters Patent. The same view was held by another Division Bench
consisting of P. A. Choudhary and K. Ramaswamy, J; (as he then
was) in K. Subba Rao v P. Nagaratoamma13. The Bench held:
“Clearly, ordering, notice does not involve any adjudication
of the rights of the parties, nor does it put an end to the
proceedings......”. Ordering of notice can be nothing more
than a step towards obtaining the final adjudication. Even
where it might cause prejudice, it cannot be described as a
judgment. It is a step in aid and such a step in aid is not a
judgment within the meaning of Letters Patent.”
11 Shah Babulal Khimji v Jayaben D. Kania, (1981) 4 SCC 8
12 1980 (1)ALT 5 (NRC)
13 AIR 1982 AP 443

We shall next deal with certain further observations made in the
last mentioned case. It was argued there that:
“it is the substances of an order that must be looked into
and not the form and that even ordering of notice can, at
times amount to a rejection of the petitioner's prayer for
relief.”
On that basis, it was held. that an order of the learned Single Judge,
ordering ‘notice’ is not a ‘judgment’. We are in entire agreement
with this view, subject to the following exceptional class of cases.
In the last case, the Andhra Pradesh High Court referred to another
aspect relating to the possibility or otherwise of a retrieval or
restitution, as follows:
“There is scope for retrieving of the situation and there is
scope for restituting. That would exclude the possibility of
any adverse effects being produced. In our view, this
substance theory of adverse effects has, therefore, no
substance.”
6. We want to explain this aspect a little more in detail which
concerns some rare situations. There may be cases where there is
absolutely no scope of retrieving the situation or no scope for
restitution. Such cases, according to us, may be rarest of the rare
but in those cases an order ordering ‘notice’ may indeed be a
‘final’ order. We are having in mind cases where a person is being
deported to a foreign country and seeks an injunction and where in
such a situation, the Court orders ‘notice’. Again, goods might be
in the process of being exported beyond the territorial waters. In
these cases the Court may not be having any power to restitute.
Take again a case of execution by a death sentence and an affected
party seeking an injunction and the court ordering ‘notice’. Here
too, restitution is impossible. There could also be other rare cases
falling in this category. We are mentioning these rare category of
cases for here the impact of the order is not only ‘direct’ or
‘immediate’ as stated in Shah Babulal's case but there is no
chance of any kind of restitution or retrieval. Nor is case of
monetary compensation help. In this class of cases, the order
issuing ‘notice’ in our opinion clearly amounts to a total refusal of
relief and such orders alone could be appealable as ‘judgments’.
Here we may make it clear that cases of demolition of buildings do
not fall in this category. There monetary compensation is possible.
Subject to the above reservation applicable only in very rare cases,
we are in entire agreement with the decision of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court.

7. Coming to the case before us, an application for injunction
to restrain the defendants from parting with possession or
encumbering the property where ‘notice’ alone is issued, the said
order cannot, by any stretch of imagination, fall within the
category of rare exceptions mentioned by us above. Further if in
the meantime, possession is lost or alienation is made by the
defendant. Section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act protects.
Further, at an later stage, restoration of status quo order is possible
under Section 144 or 151 CPC while in other cases, compensation
can be paid. For example if a building is constructed in the
meantime on the property after “notice ‘and before grant of any
injunction the Court has the power, if need be, to have it
demolished. If possession is lost, it can be restored. If property is
encumbered, the same can be held to be subject to result of the
ultimate decree.
8. We are therefore of the view that in the present case, that
the order of the learned Judge ordering ‘notice’ under Order 43
Rule 1(r) CPC is not a ‘judgment’ under Section 10 of the Delhi
High Court Act and hence the appeal is not maintainable. The
appeal fails and is dismissed.”
(Emphasis supplied)
10. We are in respectful agreement with the above decisions.
11. On a bare reading of Order XXXIX of the CPC, the
submissions of Mr. Upadhyay cannot be accepted. There is no doubt
that an order whether of grant of injunction or of denial of injunction
would be relatable to Order XXXIX Rule 1 of the CPC. However, a
refusal to grant injunction ex parte would not be relatable to Order
XXXIX Rule 1 of the CPC as Order XXXIX Rule 3 of the CPC
specifically empowers the court in that regard. Order XXXIX Rule 3
of the CPC specifically notes that ordinarily a Court would not pass
any order of injunction without issuance of notice of the application to
the opposite party. However, the proviso to Order XXXIX Rule 3 of
the CPC empowers the Court, in an appropriate case and for reasons to

be recorded in that regard, to pass an order of injunction without
giving notice to the opposite party.
12. As such, an order which issues notice on the application for
injunction to the opposite party, is an order passed in terms of Order
XXXIX Rule 3 of the CPC. Equally, were the Court to pass an order
of injunction ex parte, without notice to the opposite party, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, such an order would also be relatable to
Order XXXIX Rule 3 of the CPC, albeit the proviso thereto.
13. The impugned order neither grant nor rejects the appellant’s
application for injunction. It merely issues notice to the opposite party
to respond to the application. In doing so, therefore, the learned
Commercial Court has exercised the power conferred on it by Order
XXXIX Rule 3 of the CPC.
14. The Legislature has consciously excepted Order XXXIX Rule 3
of the CPC from Order XLIII Rule 1(r). The intent is obvious, which
is to prevent every innocuous case of issuance of notice being made
subject matter of an appeal.
15. We have to respect the mandate of the legislature, and not pass
orders which would defeat its intent.
16. Mr. Upadhyay also sought in concluding to advance a faint
submission that the use of the words “submissions heard” in the
impugned order would make the impugned order appealable.

17. We fail to understand how this can be so. This submission is
rejected.
18. As such, for the aforesaid reasons, and also following the
judgments of the earlier Division Benches in Sahil Singh Maniktala
and Nisha Raj, which are binding on us as a Coordinate Division
Bench, we decline to entertain this appeal, which is not maintainable
in terms of Section 13 of the Commercial Courts Act.
19. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed as not maintainable
without entering into merits.

