COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: CM(M) 1908/2025
DATE: 25.09.2025
PLAINTIFF: M/s Karshivnik International Pvt. Ltd.
DEFENDANT: M/s Golf International
JUDGE: Hon’ble Mr. Justice Girish Kathpalia

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. Petitioner/plaintiff has assailed order dated 09.09.2025 of the learned
commercial court, whereby application of petitioner under Order VII Rule
14 CPC for permission to place on record additional document, which is the
ledger account of the respondent/defendant maintained by the petitioner/
plaintiff was dismissed, taking a view that it is at the stage of final
arguments that now petitioner/plaintiff wants to fill in lacunae.
2. Having heard learned counsel for petitioner/plaintiff, I do not find this
case fit to even issue notice.
3. It is submitted on behalf of petitioner/plaintiff that it is only on
appropriate stage and plaintiff would suffer prejudice if the same is not
taken on record. No other argument has been advanced.
4. It appears from record that the respondent/defendant strongly opposed
the application under Order VII Rule 14 CPC before the trial court,
especially because defence of the respondent/defendant had already been
struck off. It appears that despite there being no defence to the suit on
record, the petitioner/plaintiff was not diligent.
5. Admittedly, the ledger account, now sought to be filed as an
additional document was always in power and possession of the
petitioner/plaintiff. Even in the Statement of Truth filed with the plaint, the
petitioner/plaintiff categorically mentioned that all documents necessary for
adjudication of the subject commercial suit were in power, possession,
custody and control of the plaintiff and the same had already been filed with
the plaint. The petitioner/plaintiff, despite the suit being a commercial suit,
covered by a special enactment never even sought permission of the trial
court to file any document at a subsequent stage.
6. So far as the reason advanced for failure to file the said ledger account
in time, a vague submission of “inadvertence” cannot suffice. The
petitioner/plaintiff was duty bound to be careful and diligent while preparing
and instituting the suit.
7. In the impugned order, learned trial court has placed reliance on a
complete agreement with the view taken by the learned trial court that if
such spacious pleas of “inadvertence” in taking steps are accepted in the
commercial suits, the same would completely defeat the very purpose of the
special enactment by relegating a commercial suit to the status of an
ordinary suit.
8. I am unable to find any infirmity, much less any perversity in the
impugned order, so the same is upheld. Accordingly, the petition and the
accompanying applications are dismissed.
GIRISH KATHPALIA
(JUDGE)
SEPTEMBER 25, 2025/as