COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: RFA(COMM) 573/2025
DATE: 20.11.2025
PLAINTIFF: Rajyesh Kumar Patni (Proprietor, M/s Darpan Productions)
DEFENDENT: Walnut Pictures & Ors. (Raj Roy and Sanjeev Kaul)
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Nitin Wasudeo Sambre & Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anish Dayal

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This appeal assails the impugned order and decree dated 1st August
2025 passed by the District Judge (Commercial Courts), South District,
Saket, New Delhi in CS (COMM) 409/2023. Suit for recovery filed by the
respondent/plaintiff was decreed against appellant no.1/defendant no.1 for a
sum of Rs.64,93,790.92/-, along with pendente lite and future interest at the
rate of 12% per annum till realization, along with costs to carry simple
interest at the rate of 6% per annum to be paid within thirty days.
2. The suit was decreed by allowing the application under Order XIII-A
of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (‘CPC’) which permits the Court to pass
Summary Judgment, if the plaintiff or the defendant has no real prospect of
succeeding on the claim or defending the claim, as the case may be, and thereRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 3/27
is no compelling reason as to why the suit should not be disposed of before
recording of oral evidence.
Case set up by Respondent/Plaintiff
3. Respondent/Plaintiff claims to be a reputed personality in the field of
providing varied range of services to film and television production houses,
including as a line producer in New Delhi and North India since 1998. He is
the proprietor of M/s Darpan Productions and looks after the day-to-day
affairs of the concerned proprietorship. In May 2022, one Shri Aditya Singh,
Executive Producer of appellant no.1/defendant no.1 (Walnut Pictures)
introduced the respondent/plaintiff to appellant nos. 2 & 3/defendant nos. 2
& 3 who represented themselves as partners and producers of Walnut
Pictures and expressed their desire to produce and direct a web series
tentatively titled ‘Front Page’, proposed to be released on the over-the-top
(OTT) platform ‘Zee 5’ and to be shot in Delhi NCR.
4. Respondent/Plaintiff claims that they had several meetings and
discussed terms and conditions at the respondent’s/plaintiff’s office at Lajpat
Nagar-II, New Delhi. Respondent/Plaintiff provided an estimate towards
expenses to be incurred for location, food, shooting solutions, action
vehicles, hotels, vanity, security, etc. required for the production to the
appellants/defendants, who in turn reassured that they will reimburse all the
expenses of the shooting to the respondent/plaintiff. Thereafter, shooting of
the web series commenced in July 2022.
5. Respondent/Plaintiff was diligent in the services and sought
permissions, licenses from Government of National Capital Territory ofRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 4/27
Delhi (‘GNCTD’) for shooting. Respondent/Plaintiff claims that they
incurred total expenses of Rs.3,87,93,790.92/- including Goods and Services
Tax (‘GST’). These expenses were shared with appellants/defendants
through an invoice, and an amount of Rs.3,06,00,000/- was paid towards the
liabilities and an assurance was made that they would clear the outstanding
amount of Rs.80,00,000/- (approximately) at the earliest.
6. Appellants/Defendants then, issued a cheque dated 26th December
2022 for Rs.80,00,000/- drawn on Axis Bank. However, appellant nos. 2 &
3/defendant nos.2 & 3 requested the respondent/plaintiff not to encash the
same and sought some time to make online transactions directly.
7. On 27th December 2022, appellants/defendants sent an E-mail
admitting and acknowledging that they have paid an amount of
Rs.3,06,00,000/- and Rs.80,00,000/- shall be cleared by 30th December 2022.
8. Respondent/Plaintiff waited without any success and subsequently,
addressed an e-mail to the appellants/defendants reminding them that they
would present the cheque for encashment. Yet again, appellant
no.2/defendant no.2 telephonically contacted the respondent/plaintiff and
requested him not to present the cheque for another week. Not getting any
response from the appellants/defendants, respondent/plaintiff presented the
cheque, which was returned as dishonoured on 19th January 2023 with the
remarks ‘payment stopped by the drawer’.
9. When appellant nos. 2 & 3/defendant nos.2 & 3 were contacted, they
stated that payment had been stopped, since signatures of the investors were
missing on the cheque and forwarded a letter which had been addressed to
the bank to substantiate the same.RFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 5/27
10. According to the respondent/plaintiff, appellants/defendants had
requested them to wait for some time as they were in the process of arranging
funds. Vide e-mail dated 13th February 2023 appellants/defendants again
assured that they would honour their commitment and pay the outstanding
amount.
11. Left with no option, respondent/plaintiff served a legal notice on 18th
February 2023 demanding Rs.64,93,790.92/- to be paid within a period of
fifteen days. Appellants/defendants failed to reply, and thus,
respondent/plaintiff moved for pre-institution mediation before Patiala
House Courts, New Delhi. Appellants/Defendants did not appear on the
fixed dates before the Mediation Centre and a Non-Starter Report was
generated. Thereafter, the commercial suit was instituted.
Case set up by Appellants/Defendants
12. In the written statement, appellants/defendants raised certain
preliminary objections- firstly, that the suit was not maintainable on the
ground of lack of jurisdiction since appellants’/defendants’ place of business
was outside the territorial jurisdiction of this Court as, appellant
no.1/defendant no.1 has its registered address in Mumbai, and appellant
nos.2 & 3/defendant nos. 2 & 3 were both residents of Mumbai. It was stated
that no cause of action arose within the jurisdiction of Delhi; secondly, that
the plaint was not in consonance with provisions of Order VII Rule 14 of
CPC as the respondent/plaintiff had not produced all relevant documents
relied upon on in the plaint; thirdly, that pleadings in the plaint suffer from
vice of suppressio veri and suppressio falsi; fourthly, respondent/plaintiffRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 6/27
had not produced any supporting document to substantiate the claim that has
been made for fees and/or expenses which had been incurred; fifthly, that the
suit was not maintainable on the ground of non-joinder of necessary parties.
Shri Aditya Singh, who had introduced the parties to the suit has not been
made a party. Shri Aditya Singh was in a position to depose or provide
evidence, regarding the budget which had been approved by him.
13. Appellants’/Defendants’ case was that they had entered into an
agreement with Zee for production of the web series, which was required to
be shot in Delhi NCR. In turn, they had appointed one, Shri Aditya Singh as
Executive Producer to take care of production and expenses and to engage
persons required to provide services. With the approval of Zee, Shri Aditya
Singh agreed to the budget of Rs.2,50,00,000/- (Rupees Two Crores Fifty
Lakhs only) for the entire shoot. Shri Aditya Singh introduced appellant nos.
2 & 3/defendant nos.2 & 3 to the plaintiff stating that respondent/plaintiff
was an old acquaintance and assured them that respondent/plaintiff will be
able to provide all the necessary help and services in the budget which had
been agreed upon.
14. The shoot began in Delhi NCR on 7th December 2022.
Appellants/Defendants showed full faith and trust in Shri Aditya Singh and
the respondent/plaintiff and therefore, did not get into the details of the
budget of the shoot. Till 22nd December 2022, appellants/defendants had
paid Rs.2,16,00,000/- (Rupees Two Crore Sixteen Lakhs Only)
Unexpectedly, on the last day of shoot, respondent/plaintiff conveyed that
the total amounts payable by appellants/defendants was Rs.3,23,00,000/-
(Rupees Three Crore Twenty-Three Lakhs Only). Appellants/DefendantsRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 7/27
conveyed the same to Shri Aditya Singh, who gave excuses that they were
last minute expenses.
15. Appellants/Defendants raised an objection on the last day of the shoot,
but respondent/plaintiff threatened that if monies are not paid, they will stop
the shoot and will not allow the entire cast and crew to leave Delhi.
Appellant nos. 2 & 3/Defendant nos.2 & 3 were forced to stay around Delhi
and arrange funds from their funding partners and ultimately paid
Rs.90,00,000/- (Rupees Ninety Lakh Only) to respondent/plaintiff on 26th
December 2023 to allow them to depart. On 27th December 2023, plaintiff
demanded another sum of Rs.80,00,000/- (Rupees Eighty Lakh Only) and
threatened appellant no.3/defendant no.3, who was forced to handover the
cheque and was thereafter able to leave Delhi.
16. Upon return to Mumbai, appellant nos. 2 & 3/defendant nos. 2 & 3
started following up with respondent/plaintiff and Shri Aditya Singh to
provide the expense sheet and invoices for the shoot. However, due to some
reason or the other, it was not provided; even till the date the suit was filed
and only a table of expenses was provided, which showed expenses incurred
under several heads, with no supporting documents and/or explanation with
regard to how the amount was incurred.
17. Respondent/Plaintiff started threatening criminal action against
appellant nos. 2 & 3/defendant nos. 2 & 3 for the balance amount of Rs.
80,00,000/- (Rupees Eighty Lakhs Only), while the appellants/defendants
had been following up with respondent/plaintiff and Shri Aditya Singh, but
still did not get any revert on the aforesaid expenses.
Appellants’/defendants’ case was that the maximum budget for the shootRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 8/27
was fixed at Rs.2,50,00,000/- (Rupees Two Crore Fifty Lakhs Only) and,
therefore, it could not exceed the same. Appellants/Defendants in fact, had to
recover the amount of Rs.73,00,000/- (Rupees Seventy-Three Lakhs Only)
from respondent/plaintiff, which was over and above the fixed budget of
Rs.2,50,00,000/-.
18. Appellants/Defendants stated that the respondent/plaintiff was
extorting monies and has previously blackmailed appellant nos.2 &
3/defendant nos.2 & 3. After the filing of suit and issuance of summons to
appellants/defendants, a complaint was filed before the Indian Motion
Picture Producers Association (Mumbai) (‘IMPPA’) on 12th July 2023, of
which both appellants/defendant and respondent/plaintiff were members.
19. Thereafter, a counter claim/suit was filed against the
respondent/plaintiff for recovery of excess monies, which could not be listed
for want of pre-litigation mediation. On 21st May 2024, Commercial Court
dismissed the application under Order VIII Rule 1 of CPC for condonation
of delay in filing the written statement. Moreover, an application under
Order I Rule 10 of CPC was filed by respondent/plaintiff for impleadment of
Zee, which was subsequently withdrawn. Yet another complaint was filed
before the Federation Western-Indian Cine Employees, Mumbai (FWICE)
against Zee, Shri Aditya Singh and others on 19th August 2024 by
respondent/plaintiff.
20. An appeal was filed against order dated 21st May 2024 dismissing the
application under Order VIII Rule 1 of CPC, which was allowed by this
Court on 21st January 2025 and the written statement was taken on record,
subject to costs. An application for impleadment of Shri Aditya Singh wasRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 9/27
filed under Order I Rule 10 of CPC by the appellants/defendants, which was
dismissed by Trial Court on 9th July 2025.
21. An application under Order XIII A of CPC was filed by the
respondent/plaintiff, to which reply was filed and in the sequence of events,
the application stood allowed on 1st August 2025 and the impugned decree
was passed.
Submissions by the counsel
22. The primary and principal thrust of Mr. Rahul Ajatshatru, counsel for
appellants/defendants in support of the appeal was that the Commercial
Court ought to have examined the pleadings to ascertain, whether there was a
triable dispute or not. A bare perusal of the pleadings would clearly show
that there were triable issues and, therefore, the application under Order
XIII-A of CPC ought not to have been allowed, nor should a Summary
Judgment have been passed.
23. Appellants’/defendants’ counsel vehemently argued that the claims of
respondent/plaintiff have been disputed by them in their written statement
and also, in their reply to the application under Order XIII-A, which the
Commercial Court failed to take note of that, and hastily dealt with them in
the impugned order.
24. Despite categorical averments made in the written statement, as also
in the reply to the application under Order XIII-A, Commercial Court in
paragraphs 19 and 20 of the impugned order wrongly concluded that “there
is no coherence in the reply of the defendants”. In support of his argument,
counsel for appellants/defendants relied upon the decisions in IDBIRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 10/27
Trusteeship Services Limited v. Hubtown Limited (2017) 1 SCC 568 M/s
Bright Enterprises Private Limited & Anr. v. MJ Bizcraft LLP & Anr.
2016 SCC OnLine Del 4421, Su-Kam Power Systems Ltd. v. Kunwer
Sachdev 2019 SCC OnLine Del 10764, Brijesh Kumar Agarwal v. IFCI
Factors Ltd. 2023 SCC OnLine Del 1502, Anil Goel v. Ghanshyam Goel
and Ors. 2013 SCC OnLine Del 3278, Uttam Singh Duggal & Co. Ltd. v.
United Bank of India and Ors. (2000) 7 SCC 120 Tani Sandhu Bhargava
v. Shumita Didi Sandhu 2025 SCC OnLine Del 6543.
25. Second contention made by counsel for appellants/defendants rests on
the ground that Commercial Court failed to note the actual role played by
Shri Aditya Singh and wrongly dismissed the impleadment application on 9th
July 2025. There were categorical pleadings made on the role played by Shri
Aditya Singh in the written statement and the impleadment application.
There were serious allegations that Shri Aditya Singh had mispresented and
defrauded, and even if he was to be considered an agent of
appellant/defendant, all promises and assurances were vitiated. Despite
taking note of pleadings related to Shri Aditya Singh, the Commercial Court
dismissed the impleadment application filed by appellants/defendants and
did not implead him as a necessary party. In this regard, the
appellants/defendants relied upon Vidur Impex and Traders Private
Limited and Others v. Tosh Apartments Private Limited and Ors. (2012) 8
SCC 384.
26. Third contention was that the counterclaim of appellants/defendants
was ignored and disregarded, which sought to claim excess and
unsubstantiated monies released to the respondent/plaintiff. CommercialRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 11/27
Court decreed the suit despite no documentary evidence being furnished by
the respondent/plaintiff that it had in fact spent Rs.3,87,79,010/-, and the suit
was decreed on a mere statement. Commercial Court further erred in relying
upon e-mails and communication, which would not serve to provide any
estoppel against the appellants/defendants, since they had also pleaded that
such communications were made under misrepresentation and/or fraud.
27. Commercial Court did not take into account the dispute raised by the
appellants/defendants before the IMPPA, which had issued a show-cause
notice on 16th August 2025 to the respondent/plaintiff on the basis of
allegations made regarding his conduct.
28. Ms. Smita Maan, counsel for the respondent/plaintiff, in response,
relied upon the appellants’/defendants’ admission of liability inter alia an
e-mail dated 27th December 2022, letters dated 3rd February 2023 and
4th February 2023, issuance of cheque dated 26th December 2022 for
Rs.80,00,000/-, which was subsequently dishonoured and various WhatsApp
messages acknowledging services and dues.
29. She contended that the party who admitted liability cannot approbate
and reprobate, and the suit was rightly decreed on the basis of clear and
unambiguous admissions. Further, the principle of estoppel by conduct as
established under Section 115 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 barred the
appellants/defendants from alleging coercion or denying their invoices after
having issued a cheque and signing letters acknowledging dues.
30. Allegations of coercion, overcharging and duress were never raised
contemporaneously. If indeed the respondent/plaintiff had coerced them on
25th-27th December 2022 by threatening to stop the shoot and detainingRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 12/27
them; the appellants/defendants did not file any First Information Report
(FIR) or send a legal notice regarding coercion and/or no objection was ever
raised in writing. On the other hand, appellants/defendants issued an e-mail
dated 27th December 2022, in which they acknowledged their liability to pay
the outstanding amount of Rs.80,00,000/- and thanked the
respondent/plaintiff for their co-operation.
31. Appellants’/Defendants’ plea that the budget was agreed at Rs.
2,50,00,000 is an afterthought, since it has not been stated at any stage either
through correspondence or in any communication. The budgetary
arrangement was entirely between appellants/defendants and Zee
Entertainment Enterprises Ltd. to which the respondent/plaintiff had no
concern. The defence raised was therefore, illusory, sham, and vexatious and
the suit deserved to be decreed summarily.
32. Ms. Smita Maan stated that the Commercial Court had correctly
concluded that the appellants’/defendants’ own correspondence, messages
and financial conduct established existence of liability beyond any
reasonable doubt.
33. A comparative analysis of pleadings had been undertaken by the
Commercial Court and in that light, material contradictions had been pointed
out. Appellants/defendants had accepted the services of respondent/plaintiff,
made partial payments through banking channels and continued to engage
with the respondent/plaintiff even after the alleged coercion. Reliance on
IDBI Trusteeship Services (supra) was not tenable since the Supreme
Court in that judgment held that when defence is elusive and vexatious,
summary judgment may be passed without a trial.RFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 13/27
34. To substantiate her point, she relied on the Supreme Court’s decision
in Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Limited v. KS Infraspace LLP (2020) 15
SCC 585 which discussed the scheme and purpose of the Commercial
Courts Act, 2015 (‘CC Act’) and the insertion of Order XIII-A of CPC as a
mechanism to expedite commercial disputes. Appellants’/Defendants’ plea
that the summary judgment was passed in haste is unfounded, since they
were afforded complete opportunity to file pleadings, replies and documents.
Appellants’/defendants’ attempt to file additional material after the matter
was reserved for orders, was rightly rejected as an abuse of process.
Analysis
35. Having heard the parties, perused the pleadings and documents and
after analysing the impugned decision, this Court is not inclined to allow this
appeal for inter alia the reasons emphasised below.
36. It is admitted between the parties that no written agreement was
executed for availing the services of respondent/plaintiff. While
appellants/defendants, on one hand, state that Shri Aditya Singh had agreed
to a budgetary cap of Rs.2,50,00,000/-, there is no evidence filed or
presented by them for the same. Respondent/Plaintiff on the other hand
contends that they were not aware of any such budgetary cap and, if at all,
that was a matter between the appellants/defendants and Shri Aditya Singh
and Zee to which they were not privy to.
37. Indeed, not even a single line of communication was exchanged
between the parties to the suit that a budgetary cap of Rs.2,50,00,000/- had
been agreed to. It is quite unthinkable that in a transaction of such value,RFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 14/27
there has been absolutely no communication exchanged between the parties,
for this purpose, either prior to the services having been commenced, or
midstream, or even after they have concluded. It may be useful for this
purpose to chronologically sequence out the written communication that was
in fact exchanged between the parties:
i. Cheque dated 26th December 2022 for Rs.80,00,000/-
presented on behalf of Walnut Pictures which was
dishonoured subsequently on 19th January 2023 with a
remark, ‘payment stopped by the drawer’.
ii. E-mail dated 27th December 2022 addressed to
respondent/plaintiff by appellant no.2/defendant no.2 stating
that they have cleared payment of Rs.3,06,00,000/- and there
is an outstanding of Rs.80,00,000/-, including GST. The
e-mails stated “we assure you that the payment will be
cleared by 30th December...”
iii. WhatsApp communication between the respondent/plaintiff
and appellant no.2/defendant no.2 (Mr. Raj Roy) between
5th January 2023 and 22nd January 2023. These messages ex
facie bear out that the demand made by respondent/plaintiff
for payment of outstanding amount as committed by
appellant no.2/defendant no.2 on 7th January 2023, to which
appellant no.2’s/defendant no.2’s response was that he is
receiving funds and ‘will clear the amount as soon as it
comes anytime’. There are other messages that show
commitment to paying the outstanding amount by appellantRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 15/27
no.2/defendant no.2, while respondent/plaintiff continues to
complain about the failure to comply with the commitment.
One of the WhatsApp messages relates to stopping of
payment made via the cheque, where appellant
no.2/defendant no.2 states ‘Rajesh Bhai the stop payment is
not for anything else. It is because of signature missing of
our investing partners.’
iv. Letter dated 19th January 2023 issued on the letterhead of
Walnut Pictures to the Manager, Axis Bank for stopping the
payment of cheque issued in favour of Darpan Productions
for Rs.80,00,000/- due to a missing signature.
v. Signed acknowledgment by appellant no.1/defendant no.1
on 3rd February 2023, stating that Darpan Productions and
Darpan Travels have undertaken the line production on
behalf of Walnut Pictures for the web series ‘Front Page’
and the total invoices received for the above are Rs.
3,28,76,035/- plus GST.
vi. On 4th February 2023, appellant no.2/defendant no.2 issues
a confirmation on the letterhead of Walnut Pictures that an
approximate amount of Rs.32,00,000/- payable as GST
towards the invoice generated by Darpan Productions will
be cleared before the GST due date for February 2023 and
the approximate balance amount of Rs.33,00,000/- towards
the invoice for the month of March 2023, will also be
cleared before its due date.RFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 16/27
vii. Another e-mail dated 13th February 2023 from appellant
no.2/defendant no.2 to respondent/plaintiff stating “we
confirm that we will clear all outstanding payments as
mutually agreed on 26th December 2022 (Monday)”.
viii. An undated invoice with a grand total of Rs.3,87,79,010.33/-
was raised showing the payment with an adjustment of
Rs. 3,23,00,000/- and, therefore, a demand for balance
amount of Rs. 64,79,010.33/-.
ix. Legal Notice dated 18th February 2023 sent by
respondent/plaintiff to appellants/defendants which was not
responded to.
38. A bare perusal of the above exchanges would indubitably and
incontrovertibly bear out that the appellants/defendants had consistently
acknowledged their liability to pay the respondent/plaintiff and at no stage
whatsoever, have they mentioned that their budgetary cap of
Rs.2,50,00,000/- had been agreed to and had been overshot by the demand of
respondent/plaintiff, nor did they have any justification for negotiating a
discount on the demand so made. Communication between the parties shows
that it is an outright admission of the outstanding liability towards the
respondent/plaintiff. Appellants/defendants have not presented any such
document along with their written statement, which would be able to present
a different picture or would counter the documentation as listed above.
39. The assertion of appellants/defendants that Shri Aditya Singh
misrepresented and defrauded them does not help them in any way, as
regards defending the suit against the respondent/plaintiff. Furthermore,RFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 17/27
upon being queried by the Court regarding communications inter se the
appellants/defendants and Shri Aditya Singh, counsel for
appellants/defendants replied in negative to that effect. Whether the
appellants/defendants have a claim, if any, against Shri Aditya Singh or even
Zee TV, it would be appropriate for them to pursue a claim against the said
parties. Indeed, appellants/defendants state that they have filed a claim
before the IMPAA against Shri Aditya Singh, and needless to say they are
free to proceed against the said parties, in accordance with law.
40. However, qua the respondent/plaintiff, no evidence has been
presented by the appellants/defendants which would controvert the clear
admissions of liability made and evidenced in the communications listed
above in paragraph no. 37.
41. As regards the allegation of coercion exercised by respondent/plaintiff
during the last few days of the shoot in Delhi NCR, it is an admitted position
that no FIR was registered nor was any complaint filed. Moreover, no
communication has been made either through e-mail or WhatsApp to state
that they had indeed been coerced in this manner. Appellants/Defendants
have mounted a case before the Commercial Court, as well as, before this
Appellate Court based on the allegation of coercion, which has not been
substantiated in the documents filed in the suit.
42. Moreover, the dates on which such coercion is alleged is around
27th December 2022, however, confirmation of payments were made on
3rd February 2023 and 4th February 2023, as per the letters which have been
referred to above in paragraph no. 37. Even as regards the dishonour of
cheque, when the respondent/plaintiff confronted the appellants/defendantsRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 18/27
regarding stopping of payment in the WhatsApp communication, there was
still no assertion of coercion or being forced to pay excessive amounts, but
instead, the statement made was that the cheque was stopped due to missing
investor’s signatures.
43. The documents filed by respondent/plaintiff have been denied by the
appellant/defendant on the grounds of being false, fabricated, misleading or
self-serving. This nature of denial does not comply with the provisions of the
CC Act which amends the relevant provisions of CPC by inserting Order XI
Rule 4, which provides the requisites of a denial required to be followed by
the parties. Relevant provisions are extracted as under:
“4. Admission and denial of documents
(2) The statement of admissions and denials shall set out
explicitly, whether such party was admitting or
denying:—
(a) correctness of contents of a document;
(b) existence of a document;
(c) execution of a document;
(d) issuance or receipt of a document;
(e) custody of a document.
Explanation.––A statement of admission or denial of the
existence of a document made in accordance with
sub-rule (2) (b) shall include the admission or denial of
the contents of a document.
(3) Each party shall set out reasons for denying a
document under any of the above grounds and bare and
unsupported denials shall not be deemed to be denials
of a document and proof of such documents may then be
dispensed with at the discretion of the Court.”
44. Single Judge of this Court while deciding an application under Order
XI Rule 1, 3 & 5 of CPC in CS(COMM) 1683/2016 titled “Unilin BeheerRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 19/27
B.V. v. Balaji Action Buildwell” articulated the requirement for amending
the provisions on admission and denial of documents. Relevant observations
are extracted as under:
“28. With the experience of over fifty years of working
of the 1967 Rules, attempt was made in the 2018 Rules
to do away with the bottlenecks in the proceedings in the
suits on the Original Side of this Court. One of such
bottlenecks was the stage of admission / denial of
documents, at which the suits remained pending, in
large number of cases, for years and thereafter also not
serving any purpose of expediting trial, with vague
denials being made, putting the opposite party to proof
of documents at the cost of consequent delays....
This resulted in suits, most of evidence wherein was
documentary, also being not decided expeditiously
owing to delays in proof of documents. To eliminate
such malady, in the new Rules provisions aforesaid
were incorporated, making affidavit of
admission/denial of documents mandatory and
providing stringent consequences of non-filing of
affidavit of admission / denial of documents to prevent a
party from abusing the process of Courts, to its own
advantage and to the prejudice of opposite parties.”
(emphasis added)
45. Counsel for appellant/defendant mounted their appeal predominantly
on the issue that the Commercial Court ought to have given them a trial,
rather than decreeing the suit on the basis of Order XIII-A of CPC. For this,
the decisions as cited in paragraph 24 above have been relied upon by the
counsel for appellant/defendant which must be assessed.
46. In order to facilitate that, Order XIII-A Rule 3 of CPC is being
extracted for ready reference:RFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 20/27
“3. Grounds for summary judgment
The Court may give a summary judgment against a
plaintiff or defendant on a claim if it considers that––
(a) the plaintiff has no real prospect of succeeding on
the claim or the defendant has no real prospect of
successfully defending the claim, as the case may be;
and
(b) there is no other compelling reason why the claim
should not be disposed of before recording of oral
evidence.”
47. To buttress his claim, counsel for appellants/defendants has relied
upon decisions in IDBI Trusteeship Services (supra), M/s Bright
Enterprises (supra), Su-Kam Power Systems (supra), Brijesh Kumar
Agarwal (supra).
48. IDBI Trusteeship Services (supra) dealt with the parameters of leave
to defend under Order XXXVII of CPC. Quite succinctly, the Supreme
Court lays down the principles, in this context, as under:
“17. Accordingly, the principles stated in para 8
of Mechelec case [Mechelec Engineers &
Manufacturers v. Basic Equipment Corpn., (1976) 4
SCC 687] will now stand superseded, given the
amendment of Order 37 Rule 3 and the binding decision
of four Judges in Milkhiram case [Milkhiram (India)
(P) Ltd. v. Chamanlal Bros., AIR 1965 SC 1698 : (1966)
68 Bom LR 36], as follows:
17.1. If the defendant satisfies the court that he has a
substantial defence, that is, a defence that is likely to
succeed, the plaintiff is not entitled to leave to sign
judgment, and the defendant is entitled to unconditional
leave to defend the suit.
17.2. If the defendant raises triable issues indicating
that he has a fair or reasonable defence, although not aRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 21/27
positively good defence, the plaintiff is not entitled to
sign judgment, and the defendant is ordinarily entitled
to unconditional leave to defend.
17.3. Even if the defendant raises triable issues, if a
doubt is left with the trial Judge about the defendant's
good faith, or the genuineness of the triable issues, the
trial Judge may impose conditions both as to time or
mode of trial, as well as payment into court or
furnishing security. Care must be taken to see that the
object of the provisions to assist expeditious disposal of
commercial causes is not defeated. Care must also be
taken to see that such triable issues are not shut out by
unduly severe orders as to deposit or security.
17.4. If the defendant raises a defence which is
plausible but improbable, the trial Judge may impose
conditions as to time or mode of trial, as well as
payment into court, or furnishing security. As such a
defence does not raise triable issues, conditions as to
deposit or security or both can extend to the entire
principal sum together with such interest as the court
feels the justice of the case requires.
17.5. If the defendant has no substantial defence and/or
raises no genuine triable issues, and the court finds
such defence to be frivolous or vexatious, then leave to
defend the suit shall be refused, and the plaintiff is
entitled to judgment forthwith.
17.6. If any part of the amount claimed by the plaintiff is
admitted by the defendant to be due from him, leave to
defend the suit, (even if triable issues or a substantial
defence is raised), shall not be granted unless the
amount so admitted to be due is deposited by the
defendant in court.”
(emphasis added)
49. While the counsel for appellants/defendants relies upon this decision
to state that they had a substantial defence and, therefore, a triable issue, itRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 22/27
may be noted that IDBI Trusteeship Services (supra) applies to aspects of
leave to defend under Order XXXVII of CPC. Further, as per paragraph
17.5 extracted above, the Supreme Court has stated that if the defendant has
no substantial defence or raises no genuine triable issues, and the Court finds
such defence to be frivolous or vexatious, then leave to defend could be
refused and respondent/plaintiff would be entitled to judgment forthwith.
50. Counsel for appellants/defendants cannot selectively read these
principles in his favour, particularly when, no genuine triable issue arises on
application of the facts, as assessed above, and the defence of the appellant
seems to be frivolous and vexatious. Moreover, the admissions of
outstanding liability by appellants/defendants are clear and categorical, and
in this light, the Commercial Court was right in decreeing the suit.
51. As regards M/s Bright Enterprises (supra) , the provisions of Order
XIII-A of CPC were analyzed. Though, the Division Bench of this Court had
set aside the Single Judge's decision in dismissing the appellant’s suit under
Order XIII-A of CPC and deliberated upon the scope of the provision, the
decision had been rendered without issuing any summons to the defendants.
This Court, therefore, stated that proceedings under Order XIII-A of CPC are
adversarial in nature and are not inquisitorial, and the summary judgment
cannot be rendered in absence of an adversary and merely upon an
inquisition by the Court. It was in this context that the provisions of Order
XIII-A of CPC were reiterated, and the matter before us hardly presents a
similar situation.
52. In Su-Kam Power Systems (supra), Single Judge of this Court while
deciding an application under Order XIII-A of CPC noted that it wasRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 23/27
identical to Rule 24.2 of Civil Procedure Rules in England which are
extracted as under:
“43. Rule 24.2 of Civil Procedure Rules in England is
identical to Rule 3 of Order XIIIA of CPC. It refers to
the words ‘no real prospect’ of being successful or
succeeding. Rule 24.2 of Civil Procedure Rules in
England is reproduced hereinbelow: —
24.2 The court may give summary judgment against a
claimant or defendant on the whole of a claim or on a
particular issue if—
(a) it considers that-
(i) that claimant has no real prospect of succeeding on
the claim or issue; or
(ii) that defendant has no real prospect of successfully
defending the claim or issue;’ and
(b) there is no other reason why the case or issue should
be disposed of at a trial.”
(emphasis added)
53. In this context, the Court noted as under:
“49. Consequently, this Court is of the view that when a
summary judgment application allows the Court to find
the necessary facts and resolve the dispute, proceeding
to trial would generally not be proportionate, timely or
cost effective. It bears reiteration that the standard for
fairness is not whether the procedure is as exhaustive as
a trial, but whether it gives the Court the confidence that
it can find the necessary facts and apply the relevant
legal principles so as to resolve the dispute as held in
Robert Hryniak (supra) .
50. In fact, the legislative intent behind introducing
summary judgment under Order XIIIA of CPC is to
provide a remedy independent, separate and distinct
from judgment on admissions and summary judgment
under Order XXXVII of CPC.
52. Consequently, this Court is of the opinion that thereRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 24/27
will be ‘no real prospect of successfully defending the
claim’ when the Court is able to reach a fair and just
determination on the merits of the application for
summary judgment. This will be the case when the
process allows the court to make the necessary finding
of fact, apply the law to the facts, and the same is a
proportionate, more expeditious and less expensive
means to achieve a fair and just result.”
(emphasis added)
54. The Court, in fact, decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiff noting as
under:
“99. Consequently, the admissions of defendant no. 1 in
documents and pleadings prevent him from taking
factual positions to the contrary and leading evidence to
the contrary. Further from the pleadings and material
on record, it is apparent that the defendants have no
real prospect of defending the allegations made by the
plaintiff and there is no compelling reason for trial.”
55. This decision, therefore, does not help the appellants/defendants at all,
particularly since a similar situation arises in the case before us, where basis
the admissions of appellant/defendant, they have no real prospect of
succeeding.
56. In Brijesh Kumar Agarwal (supra), the Court on the facts of the case
stated as under:
“23. This Court is also of the view that clearly there
were disputes of facts that also arose in the suit. As
pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellants,
the appellants had denied the amount claimed by IFL
and it was, thus, necessary for IFL to prove the same. As
noted above, the impugned judgment was rendered
before the parties had completed the admission andRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 25/27
denial of the documents of the other party to the suit. It
is necessary for the courts to strike the issues, as
required under Order XIV of the CPC, before
proceeding further to decide the same. It is clearly not
open for the court to avoid the said procedure.”
(emphasis added)
57. It is quite clear from the paragraph extracted above that there were
clear denials of the amounts claimed and, therefore, it was necessary for the
plaintiff therein to prove the same. Further, the impugned judgment was
rendered before the process of admission and denial of documents had been
completed, which is not the case in the dispute at hand.
58. In Anil Goel (supra), the discussion was on the law of admissions
under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC and that the admission should be
unambiguous, further relying upon Uttam Singh Duggal (supra). Reliance
in this regard has also been placed on Tani Sandhu (supra). While there
cannot be any dissonance with the above proposition, it does not help the
appellants/respondents, since their admissions are unambiguous and there is
no reason for the Commercial Court to go through the procedure of trial,
when these admissions made through written communications cannot be
explained by appellants/defendants.
59. Mere assertion that there was coercion or misrepresentation and fraud,
as stated above, cannot dilute their admission of outstanding liability
throughout their transaction with the respondent/plaintiff.
60. In this context, examining the other ancillary submissions made by the
appellants/defendants may not be necessary. Before closing this opinion,
reliance of the respondent/plaintiff on Ambalal Sarabhai EnterprisesRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 26/27
Limited (supra) by submitting that Order XIII-A of CPC has been inserted as
a mechanism to eliminate sham defences, corresponds to the comprehensive
view taken by the Apex Court regarding expeditious resolution of
commercial disputes under the CC Act, may be considered. Relevant
paragraphs are extracted as under:
“36. A perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons
of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 and the various
amendments to the Civil Procedure Code and insertion
of new rules to the Code applicable to suits of
commercial disputes show that it has been enacted for
the purpose of providing an early disposal of high value
commercial disputes. A purposive interpretation of the
Statement of Objects and Reasons and various
amendments to the Civil Procedure Code leaves no
room for doubt that the provisions of the Act require to
be strictly construed. If the provisions are given a
liberal interpretation, the object behind constitution of
Commercial Division of Courts viz. putting the matter
on fast track and speedy resolution of commercial
disputes, will be defeated. If we take a closer look at the
Statement of Objects and Reasons, words such as
“early” and “speedy” have been incorporated and
reiterated. The object shall be fulfilled only if the
provisions of the Act are interpreted in a narrow sense
and not hampered by the usual procedural delays
plaguing our traditional legal system.
......
42. The object and purpose of the establishment of
Commercial Courts, Commercial Divisions and
Commercial Appellate Divisions of the High Court is to
ensure that the cases involved in commercial disputes
are disposed of expeditiously, fairly and at reasonable
cost to the litigants. Keeping in view the object and
purpose of the establishment of the Commercial CourtsRFA(COMM) 573/2025 Page 27/27
and fast tracking procedure provided under the Act, the
statutory provisions of the Act and the words
incorporated thereon are to be meaningfully interpreted
for quick disposal of commercial litigations so as to
benefit the litigants especially those who are engaged in
trade and commerce which in turn will further economic
growth of the country......”
(emphasis added)
61. Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed. Pending applications are
rendered infructuous.
62. Judgment be uploaded on the website of this Court.
ANISH DAYAL, J
NITIN WASUDEO SAMBRE, J
NOVEMBER 20, 2025/ak/sp