COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: W.P.(C) 15917/2025
DATE: 30.10.2025
PLAINTIFF: Raj Kumar Gupta
DEFENDENT: Union of India & Ors.
JUDGE: Hon'ble Ms. Justice Prathiba M. Singh & Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shail Jain

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
CM APPL. 65093/2025
2. Allowed, subject to all just exceptions. The application is disposed of.
W.P.(C) 15917/2025 & CM APPL. 65092/2025
3. The present petition has been filed by the Petitioner under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India, inter alia, challenging the impugned demand order
dated 18th June, 2025, passed by the Directorate General of GST Intelligence,
Mumbai (hereinafter, ‘DGGI’) (hereinafter, ‘impugned order’).
4. The present case relates to the clandestine manufacture and sale of pan
masala, at various premises, which are held by the GST Department to be
connected to the Petitioner. Raids and searches were conducted in 2016, at the
factory premises and residence of the Petitioner, and various goods were seized
5. The Petitioner was taken into custody on 18th September, 2016, and was
thereafter released on bail. Following the same, a Show-Cause Notice was
issued to the Petitioner on 7th March, 2017, issued by Additional Directorate
General, Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence, Delhi (hereinafter,
‘SCN dated 7th March,2017’) as to why the period of limitation for issuing
show-cause should not be extended by a further period of six months.
Thereafter, a reply was submitted to the SCN dated 7th March, 2017, by the
Petitioner on 10th March, 2017.
6. Further, another Show Cause Notice dated 14th September, 2017
(hereinafter, ‘SCN dated 14th September, 2017’) was issued to the Petitioner,
whereby the Petitioner was asked to show cause as to why proceedings should
not be initiated against the Petitioner, for the aforesaid seized cash. The
Petitioner replied on 5th July, 2018, seeking to justify the cash which was
seized.
7. Thereafter, a Show Cause Notice dated 8th June, 2020 was issued to the
Petitioner (hereinafter, ‘SCN dated 8th June, 2020), whereby the Petitioner was
asked to show cause as to why he would not be liable to pay the excise duty in
connection with the manufacturing and sale of pan masala at factory premises
in Dabri area, near Sagarpur, Delhi (hereinafter, ‘Dabri premises’).
8. The GST Department recorded statements of several witnesses. Two
witnesses were examined by the ld. Counsel for the Petitioner. The statements
were recorded between 2019 to 2020 and thereafter, the adjudication was
transferred to Mumbai, in 2024.
9. Pursuant thereto, a personal hearing was granted to the Petitioner and the
same was conducted in the Mumbai office, on 1st April, 2025. The Petitioner
2025.
10. However, according to the petitioner, the impugned order has been
passed without affording the petitioner an opportunity to cross-examine the
witnesses. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner has preferred the present writ
petition.
11. Mr. Rachit, ld. Counsel for the Petitioner has vehemently argued before
the Court that there has been a serious infraction of the principles of natural
justice, as the petitioner was not afforded the opportunity to cross-examine the
remaining witnesses. Consequently, he contends that the impugned order
cannot be sustained. Further, ld. Counsel for the Petitioner has also taken the
Court through the minutes of the proceedings conducted on 1st April, 2025 and
application dated 3rd April, 2025, where the Petitioner had sought permission
to cross-examine a few more witnesses.
12. On the other hand, Mr. Aggarwala, ld. SSC, submits that the impugned
order which has been passed is an appealable order under Section 35B of the
Central Excise Act, 1944, before the Customs, Excise and Service Tax
Appellate Tribunal. Thus, he contends that the present writ petition is not liable
to be entertained.
13. The Court has considered the submissions made on behalf of the parties
and has also perused the impugned order.
14. A perusal of the impugned order would reveal that there were at least six
premises, both commercial and residential, which were searched in 2016, and
it was found that various brands of pan masala were being manufactured in an
undeclared manner including at the unregistered premises in Dabri.
15. After searching the six premises simultaneously, DGGI had made a
finished goods and raw materials is set out below:
“2.2 During search at the unregistered premises located
at Plot No. 1/ A (105), A-Block, Dabri (East), New
Delhi, eight vertical Pan Masala Pouch Packing
Machines were found and seven of these were connected
to power and loaded with laminates of various brands
of Pan Masala and one machine was found in a
dismantled condition. Following stock of finished goods
and raw materials were also found at the said premises.
i) 3,57,000 pouches of 'MDM' brand Pan
Masala/Gutkha.
ii) 2,25,000 pouches of 'RC' brand Pan Masala/Gutkha.
iii) 59,400 pouches of 'SNG (Sanjog) Zarda' brand Pan
Masala/Gutkha.
iv) 26,760 pouches of 'SNG (Kesar ka Dum)' brand Pan
Masala/Gutkha.
v) 875 Kg laminates of 'SNG Export Quality’.
vi) 450 Kg laminates of 'Hans Chap Tobacco'.
vii) 450 Kg laminates of 'Safari 2000'.
viii) 60 Kg 'Sanjog Zarda' brand Pan Masala/Gutkha
laminates.
ix) 22 Kg 'MB 2000 Gutkha' brand Gutkha laminates.
x) 80 Kg Laxmi No-2 Supreme' brand Pan
Masala/Gutkha laminates.
xi) 700 Kg laminates of 'Safari 2000'.
xii) 200 Kg laminates of 'RC (Royal Choice)' were
found.
a. 150 Kg 'Royal Star Pan Masala for export
classic' brand of Pan Masala/Gutkha laminates.
b. 1500 Kg 'Royal Pan Masala for export classic'
laminates.
(xiv) Some loose Gunny Bags of 'Safari 2000', 'Sanjog
Pan Masala' & 'Royal Star Classic (Export Quality)
brands.
(xv) 7250 Kg of Pan Masala.
2.2.1 Samples of following Pan Masala/Gutkha/Zarda
a) MOM;
b) Royal Star Classic;
c) SNG;
d) Sanjog Zarda;
e) RC (Royal Choice);
f) Safari 2000;
g) Sanjog Pan Masala;
h) Premix of Pan Masala
xxx
4.1 Simultaneous searches were conducted at the
central excise registered premises of M/s Raj Products,
274, Industrial Area, Patparganj, Delhi-92 and certain
incriminating documents were resumed. The following
stock of finished goods and raw materials were also
seized from the said registered premises on
16. A perusal of the impugned order shows that there were several
individuals that were related and connected with each other, and were found to
be involved in the manufacture and sale of the pan masala, in a clandestine
manner.
17. According to the Petitioner, the Dabri premises are not owned or rented
detailed facts showing as to how the said premises was in fact connected to the
Petitioner, and this is the premises where the Petitioner was clandestinely
conducting manufacturing and sale of the pan masala.
18. The impugned order also shows that statements have been recorded of
several persons, who have given the mode and manner in which the illegitimate
trade of pan masala was being carried out. By way of illustration, Mr. Prashant
Kumar stated to the GST Department that he was responsible for transporting
goods of Raj Products, owned by the petitioner, and explained the manner in
which these goods were transported from the Dabri premises of the Petitioner.
19. After conducting the entire investigation, the GST Department gave
repeated notices to the Petitioner, including notices of personal hearing.
Although SCN dated 8th June, 2020 was issued to the Petitioner, no reply was
filed by the Petitioner to the same, and the only request that was made by the
Petitioner, in 2025, was for cross-examination of some of the witnesses.
20. Two witnesses have already been cross-examined by the Petitioner, and
further cross-examination was sought, which was rejected by the Adjudicating
Authority in the impugned order, in the following terms:
“B. On the issue of Cross Examination :
(i) M/s. Raj Products vide letter dated 03.04.2025 have
requested, without providing any reason, cross-
examination of 19 individuals, all of whom are co-
noticees in this case. Cross examinations are sought in
a very casual manner without any justification or
recording of reason for seeking the same. The relevance
of cross-examining the witnesses is not mentioned.
(ii) Cross examination of co-noticees whose statements
are relied upon is required to be allowed only if the
Adjudicating Authority is convinced with the reasons
no reason for the same is mentioned. In this case, 08
pouch packing machines were found at the unregistered
factory premises at Dabri. Unaccounted finished goods
and cash was also recovered during the investigation.
Commercial Suit is filed by Shri Raj Kumar Gupta in the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi seeking compensation from
the defendents alleging clandestine manufacture of the
offending goods. This is irrefutable proof that
clandestine manufacture of pan masala/ghutka was in
progrees at the unregistered premises at Dabri, Delhi.
These evidence strongly support the allegations levelled
in the SCN that finished goods were manufactured in a
clandestine manner. Statements of persons concerned
with the said illegitimate production, employees,
transporters, suppliers of raw material, purchasers of
finished goods, all have in their respective statements
admitted clandestine manufacture and clearance of the
offending goods.”
21. Thus, the only ground that is canvassed before this Court is that the non-
providing of an opportunity for cross-examination violates the principles of
natural justice.
22. This Court has had the occasion to consider this very issue in similar
matters where the Court has observed that the right to cross-examination is not
an unfettered right. The Court in ‘M/s Vallabh Textiles v. Additional
Commissioner Central Tax GST, Delhi East and Ors’, 2025: DHC:2559-DB
has observed the same as under:
““15. While cross-examination can be granted in
certain proceedings, if it is deemed appropriate, the
right to cross-examine cannot be an unfettered right.
This has been so held recently by this Court in Sushil
Aggarwal v. Principal Commissioner Of Customs
(2025:DHC:698-DB). The relevant portion of the
decision reads as under:
order to ensure that there is compliance of Section
138(B) of the Act, though the same cannot be
claimed as an unfettered right in all cases, in the
facts of the present case, both Mr. Sushil Aggarwal
and Mr. Aidasani are afforded an opportunity to
cross examine Mr. Bhalla.”
16. The rationale behind setting aside an
order/judgment on the grounds of non-provision of the
right to cross-examine is to safeguard the affected party
from being prejudiced due to non-providing of cross
examination. Therefore, such reasoning
presumes/implies the existence of prejudice. In other
words, if the alleging party fails to prove any substantial
prejudice caused to it due to such non-provision, it shall
not have the inherent right to set aside such an
order/judgment. This view has been upheld by the
Supreme Court in various judgments including M/s.
Telestar Travels Pvt. Ltd. v Special Director Of
Enforcement 2013(9) SCC 549. The relevant portion of
the said judgment reads as under:
“23. That brings us to the third limb of the attack
mounted by the appellants against the impugned
orders. It was argued by Mr Divan that while holding
that Bountiful Ltd. was a paper company and was
being controlled and operated from India by the
appellants through Shri Sirish Shah, the adjudicating
authority had relied upon the statements of Miss
Anita Chotrani and Mr Deepak Raut, and a
communication received from the Indian High
Commission in London. These statements and the
report were, according to Mr Divan, inadmissible in
evidence as the appellant’s request for an
opportunity to cross-examine these witnesses had
been unfairly declined, thereby violating the
principles of natural justice that must be complied
with no matter the strict rules of the Evidence Act had
been excluded from its application. ...
right of cross-examination was available to a party
under the Evidence Act which had no application to
the adjudication proceedings under FERA. ... ...He
also placed reliance upon a decision of this Court in
Surjeet Singh Chhabra v. Union of India(1997(1)
SCC 508 1997 SCC (Cri) 272) to argue that cross-
examination was unnecessary in certain
circumstances such as the one at hand where all
material facts were admitted by the appellants in
their statements before the authority concerned.
25. There is, in our opinion, no merit even in that
submission of the learned counsel. It is evident from
Rule 3 of the Adjudication Rules framed under
Section 79 of FERA that the rules of procedure do not
apply to adjudication proceedings. That does not,
however, mean that in a given situation, cross-
examination may not be permitted to test the veracity
of a deposition sought to be issued against a party
against whom action is proposed to be taken. It is
only when a deposition goes through the fire of cross-
examination that a court or statutory authority may
be able to determine and assess its probative value.
Using a deposition that is not so tested, may therefore
amount to using evidence, which the party concerned
has had no opportunity to question. Such refusal may
in turn amount to violation of the rule of a fair
hearing and opportunity implicit in any adjudicatory
process, affecting the right of the citizen. The
question, however, is whether failure to permit the
party to cross-examine has resulted in any prejudice
so as to call for reversal of the orders and a de novo
enquiry into the matter. The answer to that question
would depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case.”
XXXX
18. A perusal of the above decisions reveals that while
cross-examination would be required in certain cases,
The provision of the opportunity to cross-examine
depends on the facts and circumstances of each case
and is warranted only when the party seeking such an
opportunity is able to demonstrate that prejudice
would be caused in the absence thereof.
19. The Court is of the considered view that parties
cannot, by praying for cross-examination, cannot
convert Show-cause Notice proceedings into mini-
trials. Persons seeking cross-examination ought to give
specific reasons why cross-examination is needed in a
particular situation and that too of specific witnesses. A
blanket request to cross-examine all persons whose
statements have been recorded by the Department,
many of whom are typically employees, sellers,
purchasers, or other persons connected to the entity
under investigation, cannot be sustained. If a prayer
for cross-examination is made, the Authority has to
consider the same fairly and if the need is so felt in
respect of a particular person, the same ought to be
permitted. If not, the Authority can record the reasons
and proceed in the case. Moreover, cross examination
need not also be of all persons whose statements are
recorded. It could be permitted by the Authority in case
of some persons and not all.
20. In the present case, the mere rejection of the
Petitioner’s request for cross-examination cannot, in
and of itself, be treated as a sufficient ground to bypass
the statutorily prescribed appellate remedy and invoke
the writ jurisdiction of this Court.”
23. In the present petition, the Application filed by the Petitioner does not
give any reasons for seeking cross examination – that too after a long hiatus.
No reply has been filed by the Petitioner to the SCN.
24. The Petitioner’s stance before the Adjudicating Authority is that there
Intellectual Property Rights infringement suit has been filed in the Commercial
Court.
25. Clearly, from the evidence which has been seen from the impugned
order, the Petitioner is making nothing but an attempt to completely wash its
hands of the entire clandestine operation.
26. Moreover, the Petitioner has sought repeated adjournments which has
been clearly recorded in the impugned order, in the following terms:
“3.2 Statement dated 26.12.2019 of Shri Raj Kumar
Gupta was vide his lawyer's letter dated 28.12.2019
informed to have been retracted. However, no
vakalatnama was filed by the lawyer. On this fact being
pointed out by the investigating agency, vide letter dated
10.01.2020, Shri Dhruv Surana, Advocate submitted
vakalatnama, vide letter dated 14.01.2020. Following
this Shri Raj Kumar Gupta was issued summons on
17.01.2020 to appear on 22.01.2020 for tendering
statement. In response, Shri Dhruv Surana, vide his
letter dated 21.01.2020, requested adjournment.
Accordingly, summons was issued to Shri Raj Kumar
Gupta 28.01.2020 and 06.02.2020, directing him to
appearing for tendering statement 05.02.2020 and
10.02.2020. In response to summons dated 06.02.2020,
Shri Dhruv Surana sought adjournment. As sufficient
opportunities were given to Shri Raj Kumar Gupta, by
way of summons issued on three occasions. it appeared
that retraction dated 28.12.2019 was nothing but a
proforma exercise undertaken on legal advise”
27. In terms of the above, the non-filing of a reply to the SCN and the
repeated adjournments which have been sought by the Petitioner, as recorded
in paragraph No.3.2 of the impugned order, leaves no manner of doubt that the
Petitioner has not co-operated with the Adjudicating Authority. The
28. Additionally, the Adjudicating Authority’s order is an extremely detailed
order, and has various factual statements made by various witnesses, the
seizures which have been made, seizure of raw material, seizure of products,
seizure of cash, none of which are disputed by the Petitioner.
29. Under such circumstances, this Court is of the opinion that since repeated
notices of personal hearing have been given to the Petitioner, and that the
Petitioner has merely sought repeated adjournments from the Adjudicating
Authority, there cannot be said to be any violation of the principles of natural
justice.
30. Moreover, when the matter involves allegations of clandestine
manufacture and sale of pan masala, this Court is of the opinion that writ
jurisdiction ought not to be exercised.
31. It is pertinent to note that the ld. Counsel for the Petitioner has been given
an opportunity to seek instructions as to whether the Petitioner wishes to go in
appeal or not. However, the response from the Petitioner is that the Petitioner
cannot afford to pay the pre-deposit.
32. Under such circumstances, the Court has no other option but to dismiss
the present petition, as the impugned order is clearly an appealable order, for
which the appellate remedy ought to have been availed of by the Petitioner.
33. The option to file an appeal has been given to the Petitioner but the same
is not availed of on the ground that the Petitioner does not have the financial
capability to pay the pre-deposit. The mere adverse financial condition of the
Petitioner, for not making the pre-deposit, cannot be a reason to entertain a writ
34. Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed. Pending Applications, if any,
are disposed of.
PRATHIBA M. SINGH
JUDGE
SHAIL JAIN
JUDGE
OCTOBER 30, 2025
kk/sm