COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: CM(M)-IPD 31/2025 & CM 180/2025
DATE: 22.08.2025
PLAINTIFF: SUSHIL KUMAR T/A DA POLO & ANR. 
DEFENDANT: THE POLO/ LAUREN COMPANY L.P. 
JUDGE: Justice TEJAS KARIA

----JUDGMENT-----

The Petitioners (Defendants in the Suit) have filed the present petition
under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, 1950 (“Constitution of
India”) being aggrieved by the order dated 04.06.2025 (“Impugned
Order”) in CS(COMM) 575/2024 filed by the Respondent (“Suit”) passed
by the learned District Judge (Commercial-01), South District, Saket Court,
New Delhi (“Commercial Court”) rejecting the Application filed by the
Petitioners (“Application”) under Order VII Rules 10 and 11 read with
Sections 35, 35A and 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“CPC”).
2. Vide the Application, the Petitioners sought dismissal of the Suit /
rejection of Plaint on the ground that the Suit is under-valued and the
learned Commercial Court lacked pecuniary jurisdiction to decide the Suit,
the learned Commercial Court lacked territorial jurisdiction to try and
entertain the Suit and no cause of action arises for filing of the Suit.
3. The Impugned Order, after considering the submissions made by the
Parties and the applicable case laws, has dismissed the Application by
considering the objection to the jurisdiction ‘by way of demurrer’.
4. Being aggrieved by the dismissal of the Application, the Petitioners
have filed the present Petition challenging the Impugned Order.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
5. The Respondent (Plaintiff in the Suit) filed the Suit before the learned
Commercial Court seeking Permanent Injunction for restraining the
Petitioners from infringing, passing off and infringement of copyright by the
Petitioners through adoption of the Impugned Trade Mark / Label DA
POLO, , for identical class of goods and services. The
Respondent is the registered proprietor of the Trade Mark / Label POLO,
POLO, POLO RALPH LAUREN, POLO BY RALPH LAUREN, RALPH
LAUREN, POLO DENIM, POLO SPORT, ,
, , ,
and other formative variants inclusive of the POLO
PLAYER device and other formative Trade Mark / Label. It was the
Respondent’s case that the Petitioners are advertising, soliciting, selling,
intending to sell and networking its goods bearing the Impugned Trade Mark
/ Label through the website namely https://www.dapolo.in and also through
e-commerce website like www.indiamart.com. Hence, the Respondent
sought restraint order against the Petitioners from using, selling, soliciting,
marketing etc. or by any other mode dealing in the course of trade in
physical or online market place or through website, the impugned domain
name or any other trade mark / label identical with or deceptively similar to
the Respondent’s Trade Mark and in any manner for infringement of the
Respondent’s registered mark and copyright in the artwork of the
Respondent’s Trade Mark / Label.
6. The Petitioners vide Application submitted that the Plaint did not
disclose any cause of action and the relief claimed in the Suit was
undervalued. It was also submitted that the learned Commercial Court did
not have territorial jurisdiction as the Respondent failed to show actual sale
or commercial transaction of any goods with the Impugned Trade Mark
within the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court. The Application
mentioned that the Petitioners have their principal place of business in
Sonipat, Haryana and Rohini, New Delhi and therefore the Respondent
could have invoked the jurisdiction of the Courts at Sonipat or Rohini, but
not of the learned Commercial Court.
7. The objection regarding the valuation of the Suit was taken by the
Petitioners at the first instance before the learned Commercial Court. Vide
order dated 16.01.2025, the learned Commercial Court dismissed the said
objection observing that there was no infirmity in the valuation of the Suit.
Despite that the said objection was again raised in the Application. Since
the learned Commercial Court observed that the same objection, which was
rejected earlier, cannot be re-agitated by the Petitioners, the learned Counsel
for the Petitioners did not press the objection regarding the pecuniary
jurisdiction before the learned Commercial Court.
8. The objection of the Petitioners with regard to ‘Forum Conveniens’
and forum shopping by the Respondent by deliberately invoking the
jurisdiction of the Commercial Court without any justifiable reason solely
with the intent to harass the Petitioners was rejected by the learned
Commercial Court on the ground that the Petitioners are advertising,
soliciting, selling, intending to sell, networking the goods with the
Impugned Trade Mark through their website https://www.dapolo.in and also
through e-commerce website like Amazon, Flipkart, www.indiamart.com
etc., which are interactive in nature.
9. In view of the above, the Application was dismissed by the learned
Commercial Court.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE PETITIONERS:
10. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that there was no
cause of action within the territorial jurisdiction of the learned Commercial
Court. The Suit filed on the basis of the Petitioners soliciting, advertising
and offering for sale the goods with the Impugned Trade Mark on their
registered domain, www.dapolo.in, within the jurisdiction of the learned
Commercial Court is entirely incorrect.
11. It was further submitted that the Respondent failed to establish
jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court as no document has been filed
along with the Suit showing actual sale or commercial transaction of any
goods within the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court. It was also
submitted that the Petitioners are not carrying out business within the
territorial jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court.
12. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the Respondent
filed the suit before the learned Commercial Court with a mala fide intention
to harass the Petitioners and to embroil them in litigation knowing that the
principal places of business of the Petitioners are in Sonipat, Haryana and
Rohini, New Delhi. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners relied upon the
decision in St. Ives Laboratories Inc. v. Arif Perfumers & Anr. (2009) 40
PTC 104, which holds that:
“10. Looking at the entire plaint, it only seems that the plaintiff had
filed this suit at Delhi only as a device of harassment calculated to
force the defendant to come to Delhi, engage a Counsel at enormous
expense and contest litigation. The plaintiff, who was resident of USA
could have easily filed this suit at Courts at Bombay/Maharashtra and
pursued the matter. Filing of suit in Delhi on the basis of value
allegations that the goods of defendants were being sold clandestinely
throughout the country including Delhi makes no sense. No cause of
action can be said to have arisen in Delhi. Such allegations of
clandestine sale can be made against any person without any
foundation and the plaintiff even during trial can always escape
giving proof of such clandestine sale saying that he has stated in the
plaint that the sale was clandestine and no bills were being issued.
The Court cannot be used as a tool to put such a burden on the
defendant that the defendant is unable to even defend the suit. The
plaintiff cannot be given absolute liberty to choose the place of suing a
defendant out of entire country on the basis of unfounded and vague
allegations. In such a case CPC provisions regarding jurisdiction
stand rendered useless.”
13. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners also submitted that at the
stage of considering an application under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC,
there should be a meaningful-not merely formal – reading of the Plaint. If
the Plaint is manifestly vexatious and meritless, and does not disclose a clear
right to sue, the Court must exercise power under Order VII Rule 11 of the
CPC. It was also submitted that where a clever drafting has been employed
to create the illusion of a cause of action in abuse of process of law, the same
ought to be nipped in the bud as held by the Supreme Court in Dahiben v.
Arvindbhai Kalyanji Bhanushali (Gajra) Dead through Legal
Representatives & Ors. (2020) 7 SCC 366 and also in Coromandel Indag
Products India Ltd. v. Sumitomo Chemical Company Ltd. & Anr 2025
SCC OnLine Del 4647.
14. It was also submitted that mere existence of a website is not sufficient
to confer jurisdiction unless it facilitates commercial transactions and is
specifically targeted at customers within the territorial jurisdiction of the
Court. The jurisdiction can only be assumed if there is a clear intention on
part of the petitioners to target customers within the territorial jurisdiction of
the learned Commercial Court. Further, the Plaint does not disclose any
material or cogent evidence showing that any commercial transaction
involving the products containing the Impugned Trade Mark took place
within the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court. It was further
submitted that the website of the Petitioners is in a non-interactive platform
that merely displays products without enabling any purchase or transaction.
Petitioner No. 1 is doing business through offline stores only and provides
product information through website of the offline stores thereby reinforcing
the non-interactive nature of the website of the Petitioners. Further the
Respondent has not placed any credible evidence on record to show that the
products with the Impugned Trade Marks are available for purchase through
third-party platforms. The Plaint contains bald and unsubstantiated
assertions without any documentary evidence in support. In absence of any
evidence of targeted commercial activity within the territorial jurisdiction of
the learned Commercial Court, no cause of action has arisen for exercise of
jurisdiction by the learned Commercial Court.
15. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners has relied upon the decision of
Banyan Tree Holding Limited v. M. Murali Krishna Reddy & Anr. 2009
SCC OnLine Del 3780 wherein the Division Bench of this Court has held
that:
“39. India TV appears to be somewhat closer to the development
of law in this regard since the decision in Casio. In India TV, the
learned single Judge impliedly doubted the correctness of the
decision in Casio. The learned single Judge in India
TV acknowledged that a mere accessibility of website may not be
sufficient to attract jurisdiction of the forum court. This, in the
considered view of this Court, is the correct position in law.
40. There was no occasion for this court even in India TV to
examine the finer aspects of the question of jurisdiction based on the
nature of the website, the intention of the host of the website to
specifically target viewers outside its jurisdiction, and the effect of
hosting such website on audiences outside such state. It appears to
this court that for the purposes of a passing off action or an action
for infringement where the Plaintiff is not carrying on business
within the jurisdiction of the forum court, and where there is no long
arm statute, the Plaintiff would have to show that the Defendant
purposefully availed itself of the jurisdiction of the forum court. It is
not enough merely to show that the website hosted by the Defendant
is an interactive one. It would have to be shown that the nature of
the activity indulged in by the Defendant by the use of the website
was with an intention to conclude a commercial transaction with the
website user.
41. This court is not able to accept the submission of the learned
counsel for the Plaintiff that the test of “purposeful availment” must
be replaced by the test of “purposeful avoidance” While the
Defendant may in his defence show how he avoided the forum state,
the initial burden is on the Plaintiff to show that the Defendant
“purposefully availed” itself of the jurisdiction of the forum court.
The issue of incorporating filters to block access to the website by
viewers located outside the forum state will have to be considered
while deciding if the Defendant had “purposefully avoided” the
forum state. However, that question will arise only if the Plaintiff
has been able to show that the website of the Defendant is
interactive and permits commercial transactions to be concluded by
the Defendant with a user of the website.
42. This Court holds that jurisdiction of the forum court does not get
attracted merely on the basis of interactivity of the website which is
accessible in the forum state. The degree of the interactivity apart,
the nature of the activity permissible and whether it results in a
commercial transaction has to be examined. For the ‘effects’ test to
apply, the Plaintiff must necessarily plead and show prima facie that
the specific targeting of the forum state by the Defendant resulted in
an injury or harm to the Plaintiff within the forum state. For the
purposes of a passing off or an infringement action (where the
plaintiff is not located within the jurisdiction of the court), the
injurious effect on the Plaintiff's business, goodwill or reputation
within the forum state as a result of the Defendant's website being
accessed in the forum state would have to be shown. Naturally
therefore, this would require the presence of the Plaintiff in the
forum state and not merely the possibility of such presence in the
future. Secondly, to show that an injurious effect has been felt by the
Plaintiff it would have to be shown that viewers in the forum state
were specifically targeted. Therefore the ‘effects’ test would have to
be applied in conjunction with the “sliding scale” test to determine
if the forum court has jurisdiction to try a suit concerning internet
based disputes.”
16. In view of the above, the learned Counsel for the Petitioners
submitted that the decision in Banyan Tree Holding Limited (supra) holds
that:
i. Mere accessibility of a website would not enable the Court to
exercise jurisdiction;
ii. A passive website, with no intention to specifically target
audience outside the State where the host of website is located, cannot
vest the jurisdiction in the Court in other jurisdictions;
iii. In addition to show that the website is an interactive one, it is
necessary to show the nature of the activity by use of the website with
the intention to conclude a commercial transaction with the website
user;
iv. It has to be shown that the Defendant ‘purposefully availed’
itself of the jurisdiction of the Court;
v. The Plaintiffs must necessarily lead and show prima facie that
the specific targeting by the Defendant resulted in injury or harm to the
Plaintiffs within the forum State; and,
vi. To show that injurious effect has been felt by the Plaintiffs, it
would have to be shown that users of the website in the forum State
were specifically targeted.
17. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners also relied upon the decision
of this Court in Impresario Entertainment & Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. v. S&D
Hospitality 2018 SCC OnLine Del 6392, in which it is held that:
“58. We summarise our findings on the questions referred for our
opinion as under:
Question (i) : For the purposes of a passing off action, or an
infringement action where the plaintiff is not carrying on business
within the jurisdiction of a court, in what circumstances can it be said
that the hosting of a universally accessible website by the Defendants
lends jurisdiction to such Court where such suit is filed (“the forum
court”)
Answer : For the purposes of a passing off action, or an
infringement action where the plaintiff is not carrying on business
within the jurisdiction of a court, and in the absence of a long-arm
statute, in order to satisfy the forum court that it has jurisdiction to
entertain the suit, the plaintiff would have to show that the Defendant
3 SAGSR efAll) DIDileE’ itself of the jurisdiction of the forum court.
For this it would have to be prima facie shown that the nature of the
activity indulged in by the Defendant by the use of the website was
with an intention to conclude a commercial transaction with the
website user and that the specific targeting of the forum state by the
Defendant resulted in an injury or harm to the plaintiff within the
forum state.
Question (ii) : In a passing off or infringement action, where the
defendant is sought to be sued on the basis that its website is
accessible in the forum state, what is the extent of the burden on the
plaintiff to prima facie establish that the forum court has jurisdiction
to entertain the suit?
Answer : For the purposes of Section 20(c) CPC, in order to show
that some part of the cause of action has arisen in the forum state by
the use of the internet by the Defendant the plaintiff will have to show
prima facie that the said website, whether euphemistically termed as
“passive plus” or “interactive”, was specifically targeted at viewers
in the forum state for commercial transactions. The plaintiff would
have to plead this and produce material to prima facie show that
some commercial transaction using the website was entered into by
the Defendant with a user of its website within the forum state
resulting in an injury or harm to the plaintiff within the forum state.
Question (iii) : Is it permissible for the plaintiff to establish such
prima facie case through “trap orders” or “trap transactions”?
Answer : The commercial transaction entered into by the
Defendant with an internet user located within the jurisdiction of the
forum court cannot possibly be a solitary trap transaction since that
would not be an instance of “purposeful” availment by the
Defendant. It would have to be a real commercial transaction that the
Defendant has with someone not set up by the plaintiff itself. If the
only evidence is in the form of a series of trap transactions, they have
to be shown as having been obtained using fair means. The plaintiff
seeking to establish jurisdiction on the basis of such trap transactions
would have to aver unambiguously in the plaint, and also place along
with it supporting material, to prima facie show that the trap
transactions relied upon satisfy the above test.”
18. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that Impresario
Entertainment & Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. (supra) has relied upon the
jurisdictional principal laid down in Banyan Tree Holding Limited (supra)
and clarified that mere access to the Defendant’s website within the forum
State does not automatically vest jurisdiction in that Court. A passive
website, which does not intend to specifically target an audience outside the
Defendant’s State, cannot be the basis for asserting the jurisdiction by a
Court in another State.
19. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners also relied upon the decision
in Karans Gurukul Classes & Ors. v. Gurukul Classes IIT Division & Ors.
2019 SCC OnLine Del 8444, in which it is held that:
“25. The plaintiffs in this suit for permanent injunction restraining
infringement of trade mark and passing off and for ancillary
reliefs, having opted to invoke the territorial jurisdiction of this
Court only by pleading Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, and
which as per Ultra Home Construction Pvt. Ltd. supra is not
available, and the plaintiffs having not opted to amend the plaint
till date, it is now not open to the plaintiffs to argue beyond their
pleaded case of this Court having territorial jurisdiction otherwise
also. I may emphasize that had the plaintiffs taken any such plea in
their plaint, the defendants would have had an opportunity to
respond thereto and in the absence of the plea, the defendants had
no opportunity to respond thereto.
27. As far back as in Banyan Tree Holding (P) Ltd. v. A. Murali
Krishna Reddy, 2009 SCC OnLine Del 3780, it was held by the
Division Bench of this court that (i) mere accessibility of the
defendants' website in Delhi would not enable this Court to
exercise jurisdiction; (ii) a passive website, with no intention to
specifically target audiences outside the State where the host of the
website is located, cannot vest the forum court with jurisdiction;
(iii) it is not enough to show that the website hosted by the
defendant is an interactive one; it would have to be shown that the
nature of the activity indulged in by the defendant by use of the
website was with the intention to conclude a commercial
transaction with the website user; (iv) the plaintiff has to show that
the defendant “purposefully availed” itself of the jurisdiction of
the forum court; (v) the plaintiff must necessarily plead and
show prima facie that the specific targeting of the forum state by
the defendant resulted in an injury or harm to the plaintiff within
the forum state; (vi) to show that injurious effect has been felt by
the plaintiffs, it would have to be shown that viewers in the forum
state were specifically targeted. In Impresario Entertainment &
Hospitability Pvt. Ltd. v. S&D Hospitality, 2018 SCC OnLine Del
6392, it was held in the context of the business of restaurant, that
though the defendant through Zomato and Dine Out will be able to
invite the customer and reserve a table at the restaurant of the
defendant at Hyderabad but the commercial transaction would
take place only on the customer availing the service of the
defendant at Hyderabad.”
20. It was submitted by the learned Counsel for the Petitioners that this
Court in Karans Gurukul Classes & Ors. (supra) has held that mere
interactivity cannot justify the invocation of the jurisdiction of the learned
Commercial Court and it would additionally have to be shown that the
Petitioners were targeting customers within the jurisdiction of the learned
Commercial Court through their website as it would amount to purposeful
invocation of the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court. The
Respondent has failed to show that any commercial transaction has taken
place through the website of the Petitioners within the territorial jurisdiction
of the learned Commercial Court in the absence of any evidence placed on
record by the Respondent, the Plaint is bad for want of territorial
jurisdiction.
21. It was submitted by the learned Counsel for the Petitioners that
Section 134(2) of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (“Act”) does not confer
jurisdiction to the learned Commercial Court. The learned Counsel for the
Petitioners relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Indian
Performing Rights Society Ltd. v. Sanjay Dalia & Anr. (2015) 10 SCC 161,
which held that:
“21. At the same time, the provisions of Section 62 of the Copyright
Act and Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act have removed the
embargo of suing at place of accrual of cause of action wholly or in
part, with regard to a place where the plaintiff or any of them
ordinarily resides, carries on business or personally works for gain.
We agree to the aforesaid extent that the impediment imposed under
Section 20 CPC to a plaintiff to institute a suit in a court where the
defendant resides or carries on business or where the cause of
action wholly or in part arises, has been removed. But the right is
subject to the rider in case the plaintiff resides or has its principal
place of business/carries on business or personally works for gain at
a place where cause of action has also arisen, suit should be filed at
that place not at other places where the plaintiff is having branch
offices, etc.
22. There is no doubt about it that the words used in Section 62 of
the Copyright Act and Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act,
“notwithstanding anything contained in CPC or any other law for
the time being in force”, emphasise that the requirement of Section
20 CPC would not have to be complied with by the plaintiff if he
resides or carries on business in the local limits of the court where
he has filed the suit but, in our view, at the same time, as the
provision providing for an additional forum, cannot be interpreted
in the manner that it has authorised the plaintiff to institute a suit at
a different place other than the place where he is ordinarily residing
or having principal office and incidentally where the cause of action
wholly or in part has also arisen. The impugned judgments, in our
considered view, do not take away the additional forum and
fundamental basis of conferring the right and advantage to the
authors of the Copyright Act and the Trade Marks Act provided
under the aforesaid provisions.
23. The provisions of Section 62(2) of the Copyright Act and Section
134 of the Trade Marks Act are in pari materia. Section 134(2) of
the Trade Marks Act is applicable to clauses (a) and (b) of Section
134(1) of the Trade Marks Act. Thus, a procedure to institute suit
with respect to Section 134(1)(c) in respect of “passing off”
continues to be governed by Section 20 CPC.”
22. The learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the intent
behind Section 134 (2) of the Act is to provide an additional forum where
the cause of action arises wholly or in part at the place where the Plaintiffs
reside or carries on business and not to enable forum shopping or cause
undue hardship to the Defendant by instituting proceedings at distant
locations where no part of cause of action has arisen. The benefit conferred
under Section 134(2) of the Act must be read in consonance with Section 20
CPC and cannot be invoked where the plaintiff has multiple places of
business but chooses a forum unconnected to the dispute solely to
inconvenience the Defendant. As there are only vague averments made by
the Respondent in the Plaint which are not supported even by a single
document or material on record to demonstrate that any part of cause of
action has arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of the learned Commercial
Court, the invocation of Section 134(2) of the Act is untenable and the Plaint
is liable to be returned under Order VII Rule 10 of CPC for presentation
before the appropriate Court having jurisdiction.
23. It was also submitted that the convenience of the Parties must be
considered while determining the appropriate forum for instituting a suit.
The right under Section 134(2) of the Act to sue at a place where the
plaintiff resides or carries on business is not absolute and cannot be invoked
to disregard a forum where the plaintiff is already carrying on business and
where the cause of action has also arisen. The legislative intent behind
Section 134(2) of the Act is to prevent the hardship to the plaintiff and not to
confer any unrestrained choice of jurisdiction or to cause inconvenience to
the defendant. Reliance was placed on judgment of this Court in Ultra
Home Construction Pvt. Ltd. v. Purushottam Kumar Chaubey & Ors. 2016
SCC OnLine Del 376, which held that:
“13. By virtue of the Supreme Court decision in Sanjay
Dalia (supra) this deeming provision contained in the explanation in
section 20 of the Code has been read into section 134(2) of the Trade
Marks Act, 1999 and section 62(2) of the Copyright Act, 1957 for the
purposes of isolating the place where the plaintiff can be said to
carry on business. It will be noted that though the expression
“carries on business” is used in all the three provisions (i.e., section
20 of the Code, section 134(2) of the Trade marks Act, 1999 and
section 62(2) of the Copyright Act, 1957), the deeming provision
contained in the Explanation in section 20 of the Code has not been
expressly incorporated in the other two provisions. But, the Supreme
Court has, in the said decision, given the expression “carries on
business” used in relation to a corporation in the context of a
defendant in section 20 of the Code the same meaning when it is used
in relation to a plaintiff under the said sections 134(2) and 62(2). It
would be instructive to note the following observations of the
Supreme Court in the said decision:
“14. Considering the very language of Section 62 of the
Copyright Act and Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, an additional
forum has been provided by including a District Court within whose
limits the plaintiff actually and voluntarily resides or carries on
business or personally works for gain. The object of the provisions
was to enable the plaintiff to institute a suit at a place where he or
they resided or carried on business, not to enable them to drag the
defendant further away from such a place also as is being done in the
instant cases. In our opinion, the expression “notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure” does not oust
the applicability of the provisions of Section 20 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and it is clear that additional remedy has been provided
to the plaintiff so as to file a suit where he is residing or carrying on
business, etc. as the case may be. Section 20 of the Code of Civil
Procedure enables a plaintiff to file a suit where the defendant
resides or where cause of action arose. Section 20(a) and Section
20(b) usually provides the venue where the defendant or any of them
resides, carries on business or personally works for gain. Section
20(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure enables a plaintiff to institute a
suit where the cause of action wholly or in part, arises. The
Explanation to Section 20 CPC has been added to the effect that
corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or
principal office in India or in respect of any cause of action arising at
any place where it has subordinate office at such place. Thus,
“corporation” can be sued at a place having its sole or principal
office and where cause of action wholly or in part, arises at a place
where it has also a subordinate office at such place.
15. The learned author Mulla in Code of Civil Procedure,
18th Edn., has observed that under clauses (a) to (c) of Section 20, the
plaintiff has a choice of forum to institute a suit. The intendment of
the Explanation to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure is that
once the corporation has a subordinate office in the place where the
cause of action arises wholly or in part, it cannot be heard to say that
it cannot be sued there because it did not carry on business at that
place. The linking of the place with the cause of action in the
Explanation where subordinate office of the corporation is situated
is reflective of the intention of the legislature and such a place has
to be the place of the filing of the suit and not the principal place of
business. Ordinarily the suit has to be filed at the place where there
is principal place of business of the corporation.”
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
“18. On a due and anxious consideration of the provisions
contained in Section 20 CPC, Section 62 of the Copyright Act and
Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act, and the object with which the
latter provisions have been enacted, it is clear that if a cause of
action has arisen wholly or in part, where the plaintiff is residing or
having its principal office/carries on business or personally works for
gain, the suit can be filed at such place(s). The plaintiff(s) can also
institute a suit at a place where he is residing, carrying on business
or personally works for gain dehors the fact that the cause of action
has not arisen at a place where he/they are residing or any one of
them is residing, carries on business or personally works for gain.
However, this right to institute suit at such a place has to be read
subject to certain restrictions, such as in case the plaintiff is
residing or carrying on business at a particular place/having its
head office and at such place cause of action has also arisen wholly
or in part, the plaintiff cannot ignore such a place under the guise
that he is carrying on business at other far-flung places also. The
very intendment of the insertion of provision in the Copyright Act and
the Trade Marks Act is the convenience of the plaintiff. The rule of
convenience of the parties has been given a statutory expression in
Section 20 CPC as well. The interpretation of provisions has to be
such which prevents the mischief of causing inconvenience to the
parties.
19. The intendment of the aforesaid provisions inserted in the
Copyright Act and the Trade Marks Act is to provide a forum to the
plaintiff where he is residing, carrying on business or personally
works for gain. The object is to ensure that the plaintiff is not
deterred from instituting infringement proceedings “because the
court in which proceedings are to be instituted is at a considerable
distance from the place of their ordinary residence”. The
impediment created to the plaintiff by Section 20 CPC of going to a
place where it was not having ordinary residence or principal place
of business was sought to be removed by virtue of the aforesaid
provisions of the Copyright Act and the Trade Marks Act. Where
the corporation is having ordinary residence/principal place of
business and cause of action has also arisen at that place, it has to
institute a suit at the said place and not at other places. The
provisions of Section 62 of the Copyright Act and Section 134 of the
Trade Marks Act never intended to operate in the field where the
plaintiff is having its principal place of business at a particular
place and the cause of action has also arisen at that place so as to
enable it to file a suit at a distant place where its subordinate office
is situated though at such place no cause of action has arisen. Such
interpretation would cause great harm and would be juxtaposed to
the very legislative intendment of the provisions so enacted.
20. In our opinion, in a case where the cause of action has
arisen at a place where the plaintiff is residing or where there are
more than one such persons, any of them actually or voluntarily
resides or carries on business or personally works for gain would
oust the jurisdiction of other place where the cause of action has
not arisen though at such a place, by virtue of having subordinate
office, the plaintiff instituting a suit or other proceedings might be
carrying on business or personally works for gain.
21. At the same time, the provisions of Section 62 of the Copyright
Act and Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act have removed the
embargo of suing at place of accrual of cause of action wholly or in
part, with regard to a place where the plaintiff or any of them
ordinarily resides, carries on business or personally works for
gain. We agree to the aforesaid extent that the impediment imposed
under Section 20 CPC to a plaintiff to institute a suit in a court
where the defendant resides or carries on business or where the
cause of action wholly or in part arises, has been removed. But the
right is subject to the rider in case the plaintiff resides or has its
principal place of business/carries on business or personally works
for gain at a place where cause of action has also arisen, suit
should be filed at that place not at other places where the plaintiff is
having branch offices, etc.
22. There is no doubt about it that the words used in Section 62 of
the Copyright Act and Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act,
“notwithstanding anything contained in CPC or any other law for the
time being in force”, emphasise that the requirement of Section 20
CPC would not have to be complied with by the plaintiff if he resides
or carries on business in the local limits of the court where he has
filed the suit but, in our view, at the same time, as the provision
providing for an additional forum, cannot be interpreted in the
manner that it has authorised the plaintiff to institute a suit at a
different place other than the place where he is ordinarily residing or
having principal office and incidentally where the cause of action
wholly or in part has also arisen. The impugned judgments, in our
considered view, do not take away the additional forum and
fundamental basis of conferring the right and advantage to the
authors of the Copyright Act and the Trade Marks Act provided
under the aforesaid provisions.”
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
“52. In our opinion, the provisions of Section 62 of the Copyright
Act and Section 134 of the Trade Marks Act have to be interpreted in
the purposive manner. No doubt about it that a suit can be filed by
the plaintiff at a place where he is residing or carrying on business or
personally works for gain. He need not travel to file a suit to a place
where the defendant is residing or cause of action wholly or in part
arises. However, if the plaintiff is residing or carrying on business,
etc. at a place where the cause of action, wholly or in part, has also
arisen, he has to file a suit at that place, as discussed above.”
24. It was further submitted that if the Respondent’s interpretation of
Section 134 of the Act is accepted, it would open the floodgates and invite
the gross abuse of the legal process empowering every plaintiff with an
online presence to whimsically cherry-pick the most convenient or
strategically chosen forums across the country. Accordingly, the Suit
instituted by the Respondent before the learned Commercial Court, despite
the fact that neither the Petitioners reside nor do they carry on any business
within the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court, has inappropriately
invoked the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court.
25. In view of the above, the learned Counsel for the Petitioners
submitted that the Impugned Order deserves to be quashed and set aside by
allowing the present Petition.
SUBMISSIONS BY THE RESPONDENT:
26. The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that the present
Petition is not maintainable as the jurisdiction under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, 1950 is to be exercised ‘very sparingly’ and even more
sparingly with respect to orders passed in the suit governed by the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (“CC Act”). The learned Counsel for the
Respondent relied upon the decision of this Court in Black Diamond
Trackparts Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v. Black Diamond Motors Pvt. Ltd. (2021) 87
PTC 480 (DB), which held that:
“31. We are of the view that once the Commercial Courts Act has
expressly barred the remedy of a revision application under Section
115 of the CPC, with respect to the suits within its ambit, the purpose
thereof cannot be permitted to be defeated by opening up the gates of
Article 227 of the Constitution of India. The scope and ambit of a
petition under Article 227 is much wider than the scope and ambit of a
revision application under Section 115 of the CPC; whatever can be
done in exercise of powers under Section 115 of the CPC, can also be
done in exercise of powers under Article 227 of the Constitution.
Allowing petitions under Article 227 to be preferred even against
orders against which a revision application under Section 115 CPC
would have been maintainable but for the bar of Section 8 of the
Commercial Courts Act, would nullify the legislative mandate of the
Commercial Courts Act. Recently, in Deep Industries Limited v. Oil
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (2020) 15 SCC 706, in the
context of petitions under Article 227 of the Constitution of India with
respect to orders in an appeal against an order of the Arbitral
Tribunal under Section 17 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,
1996, it was held that if petitions under Article 226/227 of the
Constitution against orders passed in appeals under the Arbitration
Act were entertained, the entire arbitral process would be derailed
and would not come to fruition for many years. It was observed that
though Article 227 is a constitutional provision which remains
untouched by an non-obstante Clause 5 of the Arbitration Act but
what is important to note is that though petitions can be filed under
Article 227 against judgments allowing or dismissing First Appeals
under the Arbitration Act, yet the High Court would be extremely
circumspect in interfering with the same taking into account the
statutory policy, so that interference is restricted to orders which are
patently lacking in inherent jurisdiction. Thus, though we are of the
view that gates of Article 227 ought not to be opened with respect to
orders in commercial suits at the level of the District Judge against
which a revision application under CPC was maintainable but which
remedy has been taken away by the Commercial Courts Act, but
abiding by the judgments aforesaid, hold that it cannot be said to be
the law that jurisdiction under Article 227 is completely barred.
However the said jurisdiction is to be exercised very sparingly and
more sparingly with respect to orders in such suits which under the
CPC were revisable and which remedy has been taken away by a
subsequent legislation i.e. the Commercial Courts Act, and ensuring
that such exercise of jurisdiction by the High Court does not negate
the legislative intent and purpose behind the Commercial Courts Act
and does not come in the way of expeditious disposal of commercial
suits.”
27. The learned Counsel for the Respondent also relied upon the decision
of Ashok Kumar Puri & Anr. v. S. Suncon Realtors Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. (2021)
4 HCC (Del) 201, wherein it has been held that Jurisdiction under Article
227 of the Constitution of India is extremely narrow and limited only in
respect of orders that are patently lacking inherent jurisdiction.
28. It was submitted that the Petitioners have failed to plead any patent
illegality in the Impugned Order. The Application under Order VII Rule 10
and 11 of CPC was filed to forestall the adjudication of the Respondent’s
Application under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of CPC. The Petitioners
have not made out any exceptional circumstances evidencing patent lack of
inherent jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court necessitating
interference by this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
29. It was submitted that, for the purpose of jurisdiction, Section 134 of
the Act permits a suit for infringement to be instituted within the territorial
jurisdiction of any Court within which the plaintiff carries on business.
Section 134 of the Act is an enabling provision, which operates in addition
to Section 20 of CPC.
30. It was also submitted that the learned Commercial Court has the
jurisdiction to try the Suit under Section 134 of the Act, as noted in
Paragraph No. 12 of the Impugned Order. Further, the Respondent is selling
its goods with Impugned Trade Marks through its interactive website,
namely www.polo.com, and through other online market places like
www.amazon.in, www.flipkart.com, www.myntra.com, www.ajio.com etc.,
which are accessible to the consumers residing within the jurisdiction of the
learned Commercial Court. It was also submitted that the orders can be
placed through these websites and goods can be delivered PAN India.
Hence, the learned Commercial Court has the necessary jurisdiction to try
the Suit.
31. The learned Counsel for the Respondent relied upon the decision of
this Court in Ultra Home Construction Pvt. Ltd. v. Purushottam Kumar
Chaubey & Ors. 2023:DHC:9093, which held that:
“9. This position was explained in Patel Roadways Ltd. v. Prasad
Trading Co. : (1991) 4 SCC 270, as follows : -
“12. We would also like to add that the interpretation sought to
be placed by the appellant on the provision in question renders the
Explanation totally redundant. If the intention of the legislature was,
as is said on their behalf, that a suit against a corporation could be
instituted either at the place of its sole or principal office (whether
or not the corporation carries on business at that place) or at any
other place where the cause of action arises, the provisions of
clauses (a), (b) and (c) together with the first part of the Explanation
would have completely achieved the purpose. Indeed the effect
would have been wider. The suit could have been instituted at the
place of the principal office because of the situation of such office
(whether or not any actual business was carried on there).
Alternatively, a suit could have been instituted at the place where the
cause of action arose under clause (c) (irrespective of whether the
corporation had a subordinate office in such place or not). This was,
therefore, not the purpose of the Explanation. The Explanation is
really an Explanation to clause (a). It is in the nature of a
clarification on the scope of clause (a) viz. as to where the
corporation can be said to carry on business. This, it is clarified,
will be the place where the principal office is situated (whether or
not any business actually is carried on there) or the place where a
business is carried on giving rise to a cause of action (even though
the principal office of the corporation is not located there) so long
as there is a subordinate office of the corporation situated at such
place. The linking together of the place where the cause of action
arises with the place where a subordinate office is located clearly
shows that the intention of the legislature was that, in the case of a
corporation, for the purposes of clause (a), the location of the
subordinate office, within the local limits of which a cause of action
arises, is to be the relevant place for the filing of a suit and not the
principal place of business. If the intention was that the location of
the sole or principal office as well as the location of the subordinate
office (within the limits of which a cause of action arises) are to be
deemed to be places where the corporation is deemed to be carrying
on business, the disjunctive “or” will not be there. Instead, the
second part of the Explanation would have read “and, in respect of
any cause of action arising at any place where it has a subordinate
office, also at such place”.
13. As far as we can see the interpretation which we have placed
on this section does not create any practical or undue difficulties or
disadvantage either to the plaintiff or a defendant corporation. It is
true that, normally, under clauses (a) to (c), the plaintiff has a
choice of forum and cannot be compelled to go to the place of
residence or business of the corporation and can file a suit at a
place where the cause of action arises. If a corporation desires to be
protected from being dragged into litigation at some place merely
because a cause of action arises there it can save itself from such a
situation by an exclusion clause as has been done in the present
case. The clear intendment of the Explanation, however, is that,
where the corporation has a subordinate office in the place where
the cause of action arises, it cannot be heard to say that it cannot be
sued there because it does not carry on business at that place. It
would be a great hardship if, in spite of the corporation having a
subordinate office at the place where the cause of action arises (with
which in all probability the plaintiff has had dealings), such plaintiff
is to be compelled to travel to the place where the corporation has
its principal place. That place should be convenient to the plaintiff;
and since the corporation has an office at such place, it will also be
under no disadvantage. Thus the Explanation provides an
alternative locus for the corporation's place of business, not an
additional one.”
(underlining added)
10. This view was endorsed in New Moga Transport Co. v. United
India Insurance Co. Ltd : (2004) 4 SCC 677 as follows:
“9. Normally, under clauses (a) to (c) the plaintiff has a choice
of forum and cannot be compelled to go to the place of residence or
business of the defendant and can file a suit at a place where the
cause of action arises. If the defendant desires to be protected from
being dragged into a litigation at some place merely because the
cause of action arises there it can save itself from such a situation by
an exclusion clause. The clear intendment of the Explanation,
however, is that where the corporation has a subordinate office in
the place where the cause of action arises it cannot be heard to say
that it cannot be sued there because it does not carry on business at
that place. Clauses (a) and (b) of Section 20 inter alia refer to a
court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant inter
alia “carries on business”. Clause (c) on the other hand refers to a
court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the cause of action
wholly or in part arises.
10. On a plain reading of the Explanation to Section 20 CPC it is
clear that the Explanation consists of two parts : (i) before the word
“or” appearing between the words “office in India” and the words
“in respect of”, and (ii) the other thereafter. The Explanation
applies to a defendant which is a corporation, which term would
include even a company. The first part of the Explanation applies
only to such corporation which has its sole or principal office at a
particular place. In that event, the court within whose jurisdiction
the sole or principal office of the company is situate will also have
jurisdiction inasmuch as even if the defendant may not actually be
carrying on business at that place, it will be deemed to carry on
business at that place because of the fiction created by the
Explanation. The latter part of the Explanation takes care of a case
where the defendant does not have a sole office but has a principal
office at one place and has also a subordinate office at another
place. The expression “at such place” appearing in the
Explanation and the word “or” which is disjunctive clearly suggest
that if the case falls within the latter part of the Explanation it is
not the court within whose jurisdiction the principal office of the
defendant is situate but the court within whose jurisdiction it has a
subordinate office which alone has the jurisdiction “in respect of
any cause of action arising at any place where it has also a
subordinate office”.
11. Section 20, before the amendment of CPC in 1976, had two
Explanations being Explanations I and II. By the Amendment Act,
Explanation I was omitted and Explanation II was renumbered as
the present Explanation. Explanation which was omitted reads as
follows:
“Explanation I.—Where a person has a permanent dwelling at
one place and also a temporary residence at another place, he shall
be deemed to reside at both places in respect of any cause of action
arising at the place where he has such temporary residence.”
12. This Explanation dealt with the case of place of residence of
the defendant and provided with regard to a person having a
permanent dwelling at one place and also temporary at another
place, that such person shall be deemed to reside at both places in
respect of any cause of action arising at the place where he has such
temporary residence. The language used in Explanation II, on the
other hand, which is the present Explanation, was entirely
different. Had the intention been that if a corporation had its
principal office at one place and a subordinate office at another
place and the cause of action arose at the place where it had its
subordinate office it shall be deemed to be carrying on business at
both places, the language used in Explanation II would have been
identical to that of Explanation I which was dealing with a case of
a person having a permanent dwelling at one place and also
temporary residence at another place.”
(underlining added)
*** *** ***
13. It is evident from the above observations that the interpretation
given to the expression “carries on business” in the context of a
defendant under section 20 of the Code has also been employed in
the context of a plaintiff under the said sections 134(2) and 62(2).
Thus, in addition to the places where suits could be filed under
section 20 of the Code, the plaintiff can also institute a suit under the
Trade Marks Act, 1999 and the Copyright Act, 1957, as the case may
be, by taking advantage of the provisions of section 134(2) or
section 62(2), respectively. Both the latter provisions are in pari
materia. Under these provisions four situations can be contemplated
in the context of the plaintiff being a corporation (which includes a
company). First of all, is the case where the plaintiff has a sole
office. In such a case, even if the cause of action has arisen at a
different place, the plaintiff can institute a suit at the place of the
sole office. Next is the case where the plaintiff has a principal office
at one place and a subordinate or branch office at another place and
the cause of action has arisen at the place of the principal office. In
such a case, the plaintiff may sue at the place of the principal office
but cannot sue at the place of the subordinate office. The third case
is where the plaintiff has a principal office at one place and the
cause of action has arisen at the place where its subordinate office is
located. In this eventuality, the plaintiff would be deemed to carry on
business at the place of his subordinate office and not at the place of
the principal office. Thus, the plaintiff could sue at the place of the
subordinate office and cannot sue (under the scheme of the
provisions of section 134(2) and 62(2)) at the place of the principal
office. The fourth case is where the cause of action neither arises at
the place of the principal office nor at the place of the subordinate
office but at some other place. In this case, the plaintiff would be
deemed to carry on business at the place of its principal office and
not at the place of the subordinate office. And, consequently, it could
institute a suit at the place of its principal office but not at the place
of its subordinate office. All these four cases are set out in the table
below for greater clarity:
S.
No.
Place of
Plaintiff's
Principal
Office (Sole
office in s. no.
1)
Place of Plaintiff's
Subordinate/Branch
Office
Place
where
cause of
action
arose
Place where
Plaintiff can
additionally sue
under section
134(2) and
section 62(2)
1 A -- C A
2 A B A A
3 A B B B
4 A B C A”
32. In view of the above, it was submitted that the Respondent can
institute a suit under the provisions of Section 134 of the Act in addition to
the cases where the suits could be filed under Section 20 of the CPC. The
learned Counsel for the Respondent also relied upon the decision of this
Court in World Wrestling Entertainment, Inc. v. Reshma Collection & Ors.
(2014) 60 PTC 452 (Del), which held that:
“7. Before the learned Single Judge, it had been contended on behalf
of the appellant/plaintiff that the decisions of the Supreme Court
in Dhodha House (supra) and this Court in Archie Comic (supra)
were not applicable inasmuch as they did not take into account the
“new media” of web-based business models where transactions are
conducted over the internet. The learned counsel for the
appellant/plaintiff had placed reliance on Yahoo Inc. v. Akash
Arora : 1999 (19) PTC 201; Banyan Tree Holding (P) Limited v. A.
Murali Krishna Reddy : 2010 (42) PTC 361 (Del); and Wipro
Limited v. Oushadha Chandrika Ayurvedic India (P) Limited : 2008
(37) PTC 269 (MAD) (DB). It was also contended on behalf of the
appellant/plaintiff before the learned Single Judge that the question of
territorial jurisdiction was a mixed question of law and fact and,
therefore, the same ought to be adjudicated at the final stage of the
suit and not at the preliminary stage of admission. All these pleas
were rejected by the learned Single Judge by placing reliance on the
decision in the case of Dhodha House (supra) which had interpreted
the expression “carries on business” appearing in both, Section
134(2) of the Trademarks Act, 1999 and Section 62(2) of the
Copyright Act, 1957. The learned Single Judge observed that the sum
and substance of the criteria laid down in Dhodha House (supra) was
that an essential part of the plaintiff's business, coupled with an
element of control exercised by the plaintiff, must exist in such a place
where the plaintiff claims to be carrying on business either on its own
or through an exclusive agent. The learned Single Judge also
observed that merely because of the e-commerce models, which have
become prevalent, and because of the use of the internet as a medium
for doing business, the tests, which apply for determination of issues,
such as, when and where the contract is made or whether the vendor
carries on business at the place where the merchandise may be sold,
or service may be offered, would not change and would be the same as
applicable to communications over the telephone and fax. For this, the
learned Single Judge made a reference to the Supreme Court decision
in Bhagwan Goverdhandas Kedia v. Girdharilal Parshottamdas &
Co. : AIR 1966 SC 543.
*** *** ***
19. Considering the fact that in Dhodha House (supra), the third
condition stipulated that to constitute ‘carrying on business’ at a
certain place, the essential part of the business must take place there,
it would be necessary to examine this aspect in the backdrop of
business over the internet. When a transaction takes place over the
internet, where is the contract concluded? This is the question which
needs to be answered. In other words, at which place does the
essential part of the business transaction take place? The example of
the Bombay firm having a branch office at Amritsar, where orders
were received, subject to confirmation by the head office at Bombay
and where money was paid and disbursed, needs to be examined in the
context of internet transactions. In that example, it was noted that the
Bombay firm could be said to be carrying on business at Amritsar and
was liable to be sued at Amritsar. In the present case, the
plaintiff/appellant is incorporated in USA. It has a website. We do not
know as to where that website is hosted. The server would, in all
likelihood, be in USA. It has not been pleaded that the website of the
appellant/plaintiff is hosted on a server in Delhi. Therefore, it can be
safely presumed that the web server is not located in Delhi. However,
if a customer in Delhi wishes to purchase an article, which is
available on the website of the appellant/plaintiff, the purchaser in
Delhi accesses the said website on his or her computer in Delhi. The
said purchaser places the order for the said article from his computer
in Delhi. The payment is made either through a credit/debit card or
through a cash card from Delhi and ultimately the goods are delivered
to the customer in Delhi. In the nature of such transactions, the
question arises as to which is the place where the essential part of the
business occurs?
*** *** ***
23. Let us now apply these principles to the type of transaction over
the internet, which we have explained above. The website of the
appellant/plaintiff refers to various goods and services. It is not an
offer but an invitation to an offer, just as a menu in a restaurant. The
invitation, if accepted by a customer in Delhi, becomes an offer made
by the customer in Delhi for purchasing the goods “advertised” on the
website of the appellant/plaintiff. When, through the mode of the
software and the browser, the transaction is confirmed and payment is
made to the appellant/plaintiff through its website, the
appellant/plaintiff accepts the offer of the customer at Delhi. Since the
transaction between the two takes place instantaneously, the
acceptance by the appellant/plaintiff is instantaneously communicated
to its customer through the internet at Delhi. Therefore, in such a
case, part of the cause of action would arise in Delhi.
24. But, we are not concerned with the question of cause of action
between the appellant/plaintiff and its customers in Delhi because the
defendants are not such customers and they are, in any event, all
residents of Mumbai. What we are examining is whether the third
condition specified in Dhodha House (supra) is satisfied or not. In
other words, if the contracts and/or transactions entered into between
the appellant/plaintiff on the one hand and its customers are being
concluded in Delhi, can it not be said that the essential part of the
business of the appellant/plaintiff, insofar as its transactions with
customers in Delhi are concerned, takes place in Delhi? The offers are
made by customers at Delhi. The offers are subject to
confirmation/acceptance of the appellant/plaintiff through its website.
The money would emanate or be paid from Delhi. Can it not then be
considered that the appellant/plaintiff is, to a certain extent, carrying
on business at Delhi? In our view, it would be so. Because of the
advancements in technology and the rapid growth of new models of
conducting business over the internet, it is possible for an entity to
have a virtual presence in a place which is located at a distance from
the place where it has a physical presence. The availability of
transactions through the website at a particular place is virtually the
same thing as a seller having shops in that place in the physical
world. Let us assume for the sake of argument that the
appellant/plaintiff had a shop in Delhi from where it sold its various
goods and services. In that case, it could not be denied that the
plaintiff carried on business in Delhi. This is apart from the fact that
the appellant/plaintiff may also have been regarded as having
voluntarily resided in Delhi. When the shop in the ‘physical sense’ is
replaced by the ‘virtual’ shop because of the advancement of
technology, in our view, it cannot be said that the appellant/plaintiff
would not carry on business in Delhi.”
33. The learned Counsel for the Respondent also relied upon the decisions
of this Court in Corona Remedies Pvt. Ltd. v. UMAC Pharmaceuticals &
Ors.:2023:DHC:5718 and in Diamond Modular Pvt. Ltd. v. Vikash Kumar
& Anr.: 2025:DHC:3619-DB.
34. The learned Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the
availability of transactions through the website at a particular place is the
same as a seller having shops in that place in the physical world.
Accordingly, the Suit was properly filed before the learned Commercial
Court.
35. The learned Counsel for the Respondent submitted that a part of cause
of action has arisen within the jurisdiction of the learned Trial Court as the
Petitioners have a website www.dapolo.in where the Petitioners solicit,
advertise and offer for sale the goods with the Impugned Trade Mark within
the jurisdiction of the learned Trial Court. The Petitioners also carry on their
business through www.indiamart.com, which is interactive in nature, as held
by this Court in Marrico Ltd.v. Mr. Mukesh Kumar & Ors. (2018) 253 DLT
8. The Respondent has produced screenshots of the Petitioners’ website
along with the Plaint. The Respondent has also specifically averred in
Paragraph No. 40 of the Plaint that the Petitioners are committing the acts of
infringement and passing off by selling, soliciting, networking and / or
intending to supply their goods bearing the Impugned Trade Mark through
their website www.dapolo.in within the jurisdiction of the learned Trial
Court.
36. The learned Counsel for the Respondent also relied upon the decision
of the Division Bench of this Court in Shree Girirajji & Co. v. Gagan
Pagrani Proprietor of Plastica Industries: 2024:DHC:2230-DB, wherein it
has been held that:
“14. Undisputedly, if a person carries on his business through an
interactive site and, sells and markets its goods through such sites,
the courts exercising jurisdiction in respect of places where the goods
are made available would have the jurisdiction to entertain a suit for
infringement of the trademarks. Indisputably, customers in Delhi can
place orders and purchase goods online through the interactive
website. Thus, the courts in Delhi would have the jurisdiction to
entertain the suit for infringement of trademarks and passing off
(Reference: World Wrestling Entertainment, Inc. v. M/s. Reshma
Collection & Ors.: 2014 SCC OnLine Del 2031).”
37. In view of the above, it was submitted that the learned Commercial
Court has rightly exercised the jurisdiction by dismissing the Application. It
was further submitted that it is well settled law that for the purpose of an
Application under Order VII Rules 10 and 11 of the CPC, the averments
made in the Plaint are required to be considered as correct. The learned
Counsel for the Respondent in support of this submission relies upon the
decisions in Exphar SA & Anr. v. Eupharma Laboratories Ltd. & Anr.
(2004) 3 SCC 688, RSPL Ltd. v. Mukesh Sharma & Ors. 2016 (68) PTC
178 (Del), Chandra Kishore Chaurasia v. R.A. Perfumery Works Pvt. Ltd.:
2022/DHC/004454 and the order dated 24.05.2023 in RFA (COMM)
No.6/2023 captioned Rukhmani Keshwani Trading as Vishwas Agarbatti
Store v. Naresh Jeswani.
38. It was also submitted that the Petitioners have admitted before the
Trade Mark Registry that the Petitioners have a Pan India recognition as a
result of the wide network of business operations across India coupled with
extensive consumer exposure via internet through its website www.bapolo.in
and other internet platforms giving easy access to the customers, purchasers,
traders and people at large at the time of applying for a trade mark
registration for the impugned Trade Mark vide Application No. 6363855
which has been applied for Pan India basis without any disclaimer restricting
the availability of the Petitioners’ goods to any particular area.
39. It was further submitted that the Plaintiffs in Paragraph No. 40
expressly pleads that “the Plaintiff has a strong and credible apprehensions
that the Defendant will expand their operations under the impugned
trademark in South Delhi and the threat that the Defendant will further use
the impugned trade mark / label within the jurisdiction of this Hon’ble Court
is credible and imminent”. This pleading is sufficient to establish jurisdiction
as held by this Hon’ble Court in M/s Allied Blenders & Distillers Pvt. Ltd.
v. R.K. Distillers Pvt. Ltd. (2017) 69 PTC 493 as under:
“12. These observations are clearly in line with the observations
of the Division Bench in Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Limited
(supra). What is important is that the treat of selling the goods
under the impugned trade mark in Delhi would by itself confer
jurisdiction on the courts in Delhi. It is another matter that the
threat perception would have to be justified, prima facie, when the
application filed by the plaintiff under Order XXXIX Rules 1 &2,
CPC would be considered or later, on merits, when the suit itself is
taken up for disposal. However, in a consideration under Order VII
Rule 10 CPC, the court must proceed on the assumption that
whatever is stated in the plaint is correct and, therefore, it would
also have to assume that the treat perception or the apprehension on
the part of the plaintiff as stated in the plaint is also correct. That in
itself would amount to a part of the cause of action.”
40. In view of the above, the learned Counsel for the Respondent
submitted that the present Petition deserves to be dismissed as no case is
made out for interference by this Court and there is no infirmity in the
Impugned Order which has been legally passed after considering the
averments made in the Plaint, submissions made by the Parties and the case
laws relied upon by them.
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS:
Maintainability of the present Petition
41. The Respondent has challenged the maintainability of the present
Petition on the ground that the CC Act expressly bars the remedy of revision
application under Section 115 of CPC with respect to the suits that fall
within the ambit of the CC Act. Accordingly, Article 227 of the Constitution
of India cannot be used to assail the orders passed in commercial suits as the
jurisdiction vested in the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India has to be exercised very sparingly.
42. There is no cavil that the jurisdiction under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India has to be exercised in an extremely narrow and limited
scope where the orders challenged patently lack inherent jurisdiction. It is
also settled that a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India
against orders passed in a commercial suit could only be entertained in
exceptional and exigent circumstances. The Respondent has relied upon the
decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Black Diamond Trackparts
Pvt. Ltd. (supra) wherein it has been held that the gates of Article 227 of the
Constitution of India ought not to be opened with respect to orders in
commercial suits against which a revision application under CPC was
maintainable, but which remedy has been taken away by the CC Act.
However, it cannot be said that the jurisdiction under Article 227 is
completely barred. Accordingly, the Division Bench of this Court in Black
Diamond Trackparts Pvt. Ltd. (supra) has held that the petition under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India would be maintainable however the
discretion, whether in the facts and circumstances such petition is to be
entertained or not, is left to the Court exercising such discretion.
43. In view of the above, the present Petition is maintainable. However,
whether the same is required to be entertained or not will have to be decided
on the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Cause of action within the territorial jurisdiction
44. It is argued by the Petitioners that no cause of action has arisen within
the territorial jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court as there is no
documentary evidence showing actual sale or commercial transaction of any
goods within the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court. It was also
argued that the Petitioners do not have principal place of business within the
jurisdiction of learned Commercial Court and the Suit has been filed with a
mala fide intention to harass the Petitioners.
45. However, a bare perusal of the Plaint would show that the Respondent
has sufficiently pleaded that the cause of action has arisen within the
jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court by relying upon the
screenshots showing the use of the Impugned Trade Mark by the Petitioners
which is deceptively similar to the Respondent’s Trade Mark. The evidence
relied upon by the Respondent in the Plaint is sufficient to prima facie
establish that the Petitioners are indulging in buying and selling of the
products bearing the Impugned Trade Marks, which are deceptively similar
to the Respondent’s Trade Marks, and are available to the customers within
the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court. Hence, there is clear cause
of action that has arisen within the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial
Court.
Accessibility of Petitioners’ website for conferring the jurisdiction
46. The Petitioners have submitted that mere accessibility of the
Petitioners’ non-interactive website is insufficient to confer jurisdiction on
the learned Commercial Court. It was argued that in order to establish
jurisdiction, the Respondent was required to show that the Petitioners were
specifically targeting the audience within the jurisdiction of the learned
Commercial Court and intended to conclude a commercial transaction with
the website user. In addition, it is required to show that the Petitioners
‘purposefully availed’ themselves of the jurisdiction of the learned
Commercial Court by targeting the viewers of the website, which resulted in
an injury or harm to the Respondent within the jurisdiction of the learned
Commercial Court.
47. The Respondent on the other hand has shown that the Petitioners are
selling the goods with the Impugned Trade Mark through its interactive
website as well as other online market places.
48. The decisions in Banyan Tree Holding Limited (supra), Impresario
Entertainment & Hospitality Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and Karans Gurukul Classes
& Ors. (supra) relied upon by the Petitioners, hold that mere accessibility
and interactivity of the website is not sufficient and it would additionally
have to be shown that the Petitioners were targeting the customers within the
jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court as the same would amount to a
purposeful invocation of the jurisdiction of the learned Trial Court by the
Petitioners. It is also held that the Respondent has to show that commercial
transactions have taken place across the website within the territorial
jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court.
49. The Respondent has relied upon the decisions in Ultra Home
Construction Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and World Wrestling Entertainment, Inc.
(supra) which are being followed in Corona Remedies Pvt. Ltd. (supra),
Diamond Modular Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and Shree Girirajji & Co. (supra)
which hold that the availability of transactions through the website at a
particular place is virtually the same as having shopped in that place in the
physical world. It is held that because of the advancement in technology and
rapid growth of new model of conducting business over the internet it is
possible to have a virtual presence, whereby the customers can place orders
and purchase goods online through interactive website.
50. As the Plaint has sufficiently shown that the Petitioners are having an
interactive website and presence on third party e-commerce and social
media platforms, where the customers located within the jurisdiction of the
learned Commercial Court can buy and sell the products with the Impugned
Trade Marks, the same would satisfy the test of having ‘purposefully
availed’ of the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court by making the
goods available and targeting the customers within the jurisdiction of the
learned Commercial Court. Accordingly, the Impugned Order has rightly
held that the learned Commercial Court has the territorial jurisdiction in
view of the accessibility of the Petitioners website, which is interactive in
nature and because the Petitioners have purposefully availed themselves of
the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court.
Section 134 of the Act
51. It is submitted by the Petitioners that Section 134 of the Act only
provides an additional forum where the cause of action arises wholly or in
part where the Plaintiff resides or carries on the business and not to enable
forum shopping. The Respondent has submitted that Section 134 of the Act
permits the suit to be instituted before the learned Commercial Court as the
Respondent is carrying on the business within the jurisdiction of the learned
Commercial Court through its interactive website, namely www.polo.com,
and other online market places. The Plaint in Paragraph Nos. 11 and 40
clearly mentions that South Delhi has been one of the largest markets for
sale and distribution of Respondent’s goods through its own website and
online market places, which are interactive and freely accessible within the
jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court.
52. The decision in Indian Performing Rights Society Ltd. (supra) relied
upon by the Petitioners holds as under:
“20. In our opinion, in a case where the cause of action has arisen at
a place where the plaintiff is residing or where there are more than
one such persons, any of them actually or voluntarily resides or
carries on business or personally works for gain would oust the
jurisdiction of other place where the cause of action has not arisen
though at such a place, by virtue of having subordinate office, the
plaintiff instituting a suit or other proceedings might be carrying on
business or personally works for gain.”
53. Accordingly, it is held that where the cause of action has arisen at a
place where the plaintiff is carrying on business would oust the jurisdiction
of other place where the cause of action has not arisen though the plaintiff
might be carrying on business at those places. Thus, it is necessary that a
part of cause of action should arise at the place where the plaintiff is
carrying on business to confer the jurisdiction on a Court under Section 134
of the Act. As the Respondent is carrying on business through its interactive
website and other e-commerce platforms within the jurisdiction of the
learned Commercial Court and that the cause of action has arisen as the
Petitioners are also offering to sell the products with Impugned Trade Marks
within the jurisdiction of the learned Commercial Court, the objection with
regard to the territorial jurisdiction as raised by the Petitioners is not
maintainable. Accordingly, there is no infirmity with the Impugned Order.
54. Although, the Petitioners have raised the objection with regard to
under-valuation and lack of pecuniary jurisdiction, the Impugned Order
clearly states that the said objection was not pressed before the learned
Commercial Court. The Petitioners have not challenged the said finding of
the Impugned Order. In view of the same, there is no necessity to examine
the said objection.
55. It is trite law that while deciding the Application under Order VII
Rules 10 and 11 of CPC, the averments made in the Plaint are presumed to
be correct and the Application is decided on demurrer. Considering the
overall averments made in the Plaint and the prima facie perusal of the
documents filed along with the Plaint show that the Respondent has made
out a case for maintaining the Suit before the learned Commercial Court.
Therefore, the Impugned Order does not suffer from any infirmity
warranting interference by this Court while exercising supervisory
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, 1950. The
findings by the learned Commercial Court in the Impugned Order are
reasoned and well within the jurisdiction of the powers conferred under
Order VII Rules 10 and 11 of the CPC.
56. Accordingly, the present Petition is without any merits and is hereby
dismissed. Pending Applications, if any, stand disposed of. 