COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: CS(COMM) 533/2018 & I.A. 19406/2022
DATE: 13.10.2025
PLAINTIFF: KONINKLIJKE PHILIPS N.V.
DEFENDANT: M. BATHLA & ANR.
JUDGE: Justice MINI PUSHKARNA

----JUDGMENT-----

INTRODUCTION:
1. The present suit, initially filed as CS(OS) 635/2004, has been
instituted seeking an order for permanent injunction restraining the
defendants from manufacturing, selling and offering for sale Video Compact
Disc (“VCD”) systems and media, amounting to infringement of the
plaintiff‟s Indian Patent No. 175971 dated 28th May, 1990 for a ‗Digital
Transmission System‘ (“suit patent”), along with rendition of accounts and
damages.
2. By way of the order dated 31st May, 2004, this Court had directed that
the defendants would not use the patented process claimed in the suit patent
in the manufacture/production of its VCDs, without obtaining the necessary
license. Subsequently, the said interim direction of this Court was modified
vide order dated 05th October, 2004, wherein, the parties had handed over an
application recording a settlement governing the interim relief claimed in the
suit. Accordingly, vide order dated 05th October, 2004, the interim order
dated 31st May, 2004 was modified in the following manner:
―xxx xxx xxx
―1. The defendant claims that it is not infringing Patent No. 175971
of the plaintiff and will not do so till the disposal of the suit.
2. The trial of the suit will be completed within six months from the date
of the order and both the parties will assist the Local Commissioner and
the Court in adhering to this schedule.
3. In the meantime the defendant will file three monthly accounts of the
production and sales of VCDs. The defendant will make sure and
undertake that in case they are found to be infringing the patent of the
plaintiff they will pay the royalty and will not encumber or alienate
properties of appropriate value to ensure this.
4. The evidence in the case will be recorded before a Local
Commissioner. The parties shall be at liberty to use technical experts.
The defendant No. 2 will disclose the figures of VCD production and
sales on affidavit from date of commencement of production till
September, 2004 on affidavit.‖
This order will govern the proceedings during the pendency of
the suit.
The application stands disposed of accordingly.
The application for interim relief being IA No. 3784/2004 also
stands disposed of accordingly.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
3. Based upon the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were
framed by the Court vide order dated 07th January, 2005:
―xxx xxx xxx
1. Whether the plaint has been instituted, signed and verified by a
duly authorised person -- O.P.P.
2. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties, if so,
to what effect -- O.P.D.
3. Whether the plaintiff is the proprietor of Patent No. 175971 and
whether the same is a subsisting patent -- O.P.P.
4. In case issue No. 3 is proved in the affirmative, whether the
technique used by the defendant infringes Indian Patent No.
175971 -- O.P.P.
5. Whether there are already different and better-known techniques
available that do digital transmission of data and, therefore,
negate Indian Patent No. 175971 -- O.P.D.
6. Whether the defendant is using a unique technique as claimed by
him, if so, to what effect -- O.P.D.
7. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim Rs. 20 lakhs as damages
as claimed by it -- O.P.P.
8. To what other relief, if any, is the plaintiff entitled.
xxx xxx xxx‖
4. This Court notes that the suit patent expired during the course of
present proceedings on 28th May, 2010, and it was recorded in this Court‟s
order dated 17th July, 2023, that the only surviving issues relate to
infringement and damages.
5. Furthermore, two Local Commissioners were appointed by this Court,
vide order dated 31st May, 2004, to visit and inspect the premises of the
defendants at BCI Optical Disc Ltd., 2, S.S.I. Industrial Area, G.T. Karnal
Road, Delhi – 110033 and 163, HSIDC Industrial Complex, Kundli,
Haryana and to take samples of infringing VCDs, prepare inventory of
equipment, replicators, etc.
6. Pursuant thereto, two local commissions were conducted at the
respective premises on 05th June, 2004. The details of materials found at the
premises during the course of execution of the local commissions, are as
under:
i. At BCI Optical Disc Limited, 2, SSI Industrial Area, G.T. Karnal
Road, Delhi-110033: Two replication lines/machines of „Emolded
Fanuc Series‟ 180 IS - IB of Singulus Emould Test Type No. S2000
A039P1891 11-0-2-2004 Mould type AXXSA - Mould AXX 3607
Stamper holder Type P000 861/IS A 6956 were found; audio Compact
Disc (“CD”) of „Mukesh Ki Yaad Mein‟ was found in offset printer
HS - 260 F making Audio and two audio CD samples of „Mukesh Ki
Yaadein‟ and „Bichua‟ Re-mix were found.
ii. At 163, HSIDC Industrial Complex, Kundli, Haryana: Plant I -
consisting of moulding machine and metalizing plant manufactured by
M/s Singulus Technologies (“Singulus”); Plant II - consisting of
moulding machine - Make ARBURG - manufactured by Singulus
Offset Printing Machine - manufactured by KAMMAN. Further, Mr.
Nithin Bathla, son of defendant no. 1, and the defendant no. 1 himself
informed the Local Commissioner that defendants manufacture CDROMs, Audio CDs, and that VCDs are manufactured only on order
basis.
7. It is pertinent to note that the plaintiff herein had filed a contempt
petition, i.e., CCP No. 135/2004, before this Court against the defendants,
alleging that they had acted in utter disregard and in disobedience of this
Court‟s orders during the local commissions, by refusing to handover certain
documents pertaining to the production and sale of the infringing VCDs, and
thereby, thwarting the orders of this Court passed in the present suit.
8. Subsequently, the aforesaid contempt petition came to be disposed of
vide order dated 10th
January, 2012, in the below mentioned terms:
― Present contempt petition has been filed by the petitioner
primarily on the ground that when the Local Commissioner
appointed by this court vide order dated 31.05.2004, visited the
office of respondents, they refused to produce the register, invoice
books and stampers.
Perusal of the report of the Local Commissioner shows
that Mr. Bathla had informed the Local Commissioner that the
register, invoice books and stampers would be produced before
the Court. Mr. Pravin Anand, counsel for the petitioner does not
press the contempt petition, however, he submits that court
should draw an adverse inference for non-producing the
register, invoice books and stampers. He further submits that
effect of non-production of these documents be considered by
the Court at the time of final hearing of the matter. The stand of
counsel for the petitioner is fair, which is not opposed by the
other side. Accordingly, the contempt petition stands disposed of,
in above terms.‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
FACTUAL MATRIX OF THE CASE:
9. The facts, as setup by the plaintiff in the plaint, are as follows:
9.1. The plaintiff herein is a company incorporated under the laws of
Netherlands and has its principal place of business at Groenewoudseweg 1,
5621BA Eindhoven, the Netherlands. The plaintiff was known as N.V Philips
Gloeilampenfabrieken, prior to changing its name to Philips Electronics N.V.
Subsequently, the plaintiff underwent another name change to Koninklijke
Philips Electronics N.V. At present, the official name of the plaintiff is
Koninklijke Philips N.V.
9.2. The plaintiff is a world leader in digital technologies for television and
displays, wireless communications, speech recognition, video compression,
storage and optical products, as well as the underlying semiconductor
technology.
9.3. The plaintiff has made substantial investment in Research and
Development (“R&D”), resulting in inventions such as, Compact Cassette
system and the laser based optical disc systems such as CD-Audio, CDROM, Video-CD, CD-R/RW, SACD and various DVD formats.
9.4. The plaintiff, during the years 1999 to 2003, has made substantial
expenditures on its R&D activities, the details of which, are as follows:
Year Amount Spent on R&D
(in EURO million)
Percentage of Plaintiff’s
Sales (in %)
1999 2,284 7.3
2000 2,766 7.3
2001 3,312 10.2
2002 3,043 9.5
2003 2,617 9.0
9.5. The plaintiff holds key patents in various technologies, such as, optical
recording technology (CD/DVD players/recorders and discs), digital
compression technology (MPEG audio/video encoding and decoding, JPEG
(Joint Photographic Experts Group), MP3, DAB, video conferencing, and
DVB).
9.6. At the time of filing the suit, the plaintiff held about 1,00,000 patent
rights, 22,000 trademark registrations, 6,000 design registrations and some
2,000 domain name registrations, as created and managed by the Philips
Intellectual Property and Standards Organization, being a business group of
the plaintiff company.
9.7. Due to the concurrent R&D going in the field of optical disc
technology, several leading manufacturing companies had collaborated on
the research results and created a „pool of patents‟. This pool of patents not
only included technology for the media but also for the disc player. The
plaintiff has also made significant contribution to this pool. One such
achievement is a VCD using MPEG (Moving Picture Experts Group) coding
with better audio coding technique, and the plaintiff, being a part of the
patent pool, has the right to license and sub-license the same.
9.8. The plaintiff is the owner of the suit patent, i.e., Indian Patent No.
175971 dated 28th May, 1990 for a ‗Digital Transmission System‘, which
covers an efficient audio signal compression and transmission system. This
system is used in the MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 audio compression systems
standardized in ISO/IEC 11172-3: 1993 (E) (“ISO/IEC 11172-3”) and works
for different sample frequencies and transmission bit rates and has the
objective of transmitting digital wide-band audio signals in a flexible and
highly versatile transmission system.
9.9. The objective, as aforesaid, is achieved by having an efficient
distribution of information packets in a frame with the flexibility of having
variable number of information packets in one frame. This method, thereby,
enables synchronization to be maintained on an „information packet‟ basis,
which is simpler and more reliable than maintaining synchronization on a
„bit‟ basis.
9.10. The versatility of the transmission system, as claimed in the suit
patent, lies in the fact that the invention can be applied to any audio coding
and compression scheme. More specifically, the suit patent is able to convert
differently sampled formats of wide-band digital audio signal that are packed
as information packets, which are further packed in the form of frames and
written onto a transmission medium.
9.11. As per the invention, the number of information packets in one frame
is „P‟, and in that, if „P‟ is not an integer, the number of information packets
in a number of frame is P‟, P‟ being the next lower integer following „P‟, and
the number of information packets in the other frames is equal to P‟ + l, so as
to exactly comply with the requirement that the average frame rate of the
second digital signal, be substantially equal to Fs/ns (i.e., sample
frequency/number of samples), and that a frame should comprise at least a
first frame portion including synchronizing information.
9.12. Owing to the plaintiff‟s right in the suit patent, plaintiff along with its
group partners, had licensed the patent technology to a number of companies
in India, including:
- Moser Baer India Limited, New Delhi
- Super Cassettes Industries Limited, New Delhi
- KRCD (India) Pvt. Limited, Mumbai
- Jet-Speed Audio Pvt. Limited, Mumbai
- Sagarika Acoustronics Pvt. Limited, Mumbai
- Multimedia Frontiers Limited, Ahmedabad
- Anant Electronics Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai
- Siddharth Optical Disc Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi
- Futuristic Concepts Media Ltd., Mumbai
- PentaMedia Graphics Limited, Chennai
9.13. Defendant no. 2 is a company located at 2, S.S.I. Industrial Area, G.T
Karnal Road, Delhi-110033, and also having premises at 163, HSIDC
Industrial Complex, Kundli District, Haryana, whereas, defendant no. 1 is
the director of defendant no. 2 company. As per the knowledge of the
plaintiff, the defendants are engaged in manufacture/replication and sale of,
inter alia, VCDs using MPEG-1 coding audio compression/expansion
system, which infringes the suit patent.
9.14. On 04th June, 2001, the plaintiff, through its business group - Philips
System Standards and Licensing, reached out to the defendants and
forwarded a Questionnaire Form, along with the details of plaintiff‟s Video
CD Disc License Program, to defendant no. 1.
9.15. Thereafter, on 31st August, 2001, another letter was addressed by Mr.
F.N. Bhiwandiwalla of Philips India Limited to the defendants, requiring
them to return the duly filled Questionnaire Form so that appropriate license
agreement papers could be forwarded to the defendants. Consequently, a
meeting was arranged to take place between Mr. Bhiwandiwalla and
defendant no. 2 at New Delhi on 29th August, 2001, however, the same did
not materialize on account of some preoccupation on the part of defendants.
9.16. On 30th April, 2003, Mr. Bhiwandiwalla, on behalf of the plaintiff,
addressed defendant no. 1 regarding the standard royalty rate payable per
VCD, offering reduced rates, subject to the condition that the defendants
complied with plaintiff‟s licensing requirements by 30th June, 2003.
9.17. Subsequently, on 29th August, 2003, defendant no. 1 requested the
plaintiff to depute a representative to discuss the matter. Pursuant thereto, by
communication dated 08th September, 2003, the plaintiff once again
requested return of the Questionnaire/Application Form and expressed
readiness to meet the defendants.
9.18. On 17th September, 2003, the plaintiff proposed a meeting for 22nd
September, 2003, which proposal was confirmed by defendant no. 1 through
facsimile of the same date. In the meeting so held, it was agreed that the
defendants would complete the Application Form by supplying particulars,
including, past production details and a proposal regarding the timeframe
required to tide over the past-use issue.
9.19. By way of the letter dated 24th September, 2003, the plaintiff
confirmed the understanding reached in the aforesaid meeting. This was
followed by reminder letters dated 03rd October, 2003 and 20th October,
2003, requiring submission of the Application Form and past production
details by 31st October, 2003, failing which, the plaintiff would assume
disinterest on the part of the defendants in obtaining the plaintiff‟s VCD
license agreements.
9.20. Thereafter, the plaintiff, by a letter dated 12th December, 2003, once
again pressed for immediate compliance, to which, defendant no. 1, by its
reply dated 18th December, 2003, assured readiness to pay royalty, furnish
information, while seeking reduction of royalty rates.
9.21. In response, by way of the letter dated 29th December, 2003, the
plaintiff clarified that no distinction could be made between licensees based
on their size as licensing was on standard terms worldwide, and further that
the correct royalty rate was US $0.03 cents per VCD, with the higher rate of
US $1.75 cents being applicable only to fully compliant licensees.
9.22. On 12th January, 2004, defendant no. 1 reiterated its willingness to
obtain the licenses, but sought reduction of royalty rates. By its letter dated
15th January, 2004, the plaintiff granted last opportunity to the defendants to
supply the required information by 31st January, 2004. The defendants
responded vide letter dated 27th January, 2004, and again attempted to seek
reduction in royalty rates.
9.23. Finally, on 25th February, 2004, the plaintiff once again sought
compliance with its intellectual property protection regime. However, there
was no response from the defendants.
9.24. Thereafter, on 13th April, 2004, a representative of the plaintiff
obtained six VCDs belonging to the defendants from ‗Planet M‘, a music
store in New Delhi. From a perusal of the inlay cards in the aforesaid VCDs,
it was apparent that the defendants continued to manufacture as well as sell
VCDs, which were infringing the suit patent.
9.25. Thus, it became clear to the plaintiff that defendants were not
interested in taking any license from them and therefore, the present suit was
instituted by the plaintiff, seeking permanent injunction and damages against
the defendants with respect to defendants‟ infringing use of the suit patent.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFF:
10. The submissions, put forth by the plaintiff, are as follows:
10.1. The suit patent was valid and subsisting when the suit was filed and
expired on 28th May 2010, during which period, all renewal fees was paid,
and the same was being infringed till its expiry. No pre-grant/post-grant
opposition or revocation had been filed against the suit patent. The suit
patent was granted after 07 years of scrutiny by the Indian Patent Office and
on the date of institution of the present suit, the patent was 14 years old.
10.2. The defendants have not challenged the validity of the suit patent
either by filing a counter-claim before the Court or by way of a revocation
proceeding before the Intellectual Property Appellate Board (“IPAB”),
thereby, not disputing the validity of the suit patent.
10.3. Even otherwise, defendants‟ defence of invalidity is untenable, as
defendants have merely averred that the suit patent is not patentable under
Section 3(k) of the Indian Patents Act, 1970 (“Patents Act”). However, the
same is incorrect since patents, as technical measures and medium are
protected, and not formula. Moreover, previously as well, the plaintiff has
been successful in obtaining ex-parte ad interim injunction orders in other
suits filed against third parties for the same patent before this Court in Suit
No. 1306/2003 and Suit No. 1307/2003.
10.4. The plaintiff engaged in a series of correspondence spanning over
three years, i.e., 04th June, 2001 to 25th February, 2004, wherein, plaintiff
requested the defendants to take appropriate licenses. However, the
defendants engaged in the said correspondences only with the aim of
prolonging the matter without having any intention to obtain the appropriate
licenses from the plaintiff for the suit patent.
10.5. A perusal of the series of correspondence between the parties clearly
shows that the defendants themselves have admitted using the technology
covered under the suit patent and were aware of the need to take requisite
licenses from the plaintiff. The said series of correspondence, from 2001 till
2004, proves that the defendants recognized the rights of the plaintiff in the
technology and did not themselves, claim any right in it.
10.6. Defendants have admitted in their letter dated 18th December, 2003
that the plaintiff‟s patent is an essential patent by stating that ―…for the use
of essential patents of Philips…‖. Therefore, the defences raised by the
defendants are merely an afterthought as the defendants had evidently
accepted the patent rights of the plaintiff and proceeded to negotiate the
license terms. Defendant no. 1‟s contention that the defendants were merely
making inquiry is incorrect, as no such indication can be gathered from the
series of correspondence on record.
10.7. Even subsequent to the aforesaid correspondence, plaintiff‟s
representative obtained certain VCDs of the defendants from ‗Planet M‘ in
New Delhi on 13th April, 2004, and a perusal of inlay cards of the said VCDs
clearly shows that the defendants continued to manufacture and sell VCDs
according to the suit patent held by the plaintiff.
10.8. The VCDs of the defendants are played on the VCD players (VCD
Decoders) specifically meant for decoding the audio stream compressed
according to the suit patent, being Indian Patent No. 175971. The fact that
the defendants‟ VCD is compatible with the VCD Decoders, specifically
meant for decoding the audio stream compressed according to the suit patent,
is prima facie evidence that the defendants use the compression technique
disclosed in the said patent.
10.9. Application of audio content to any VCD using the patented
process/system of the plaintiff, would amount to an infringement of the suit
patent. Additionally, any person/entity indulging in the replication of VCDs
using the patented process of the plaintiff, or for that matter, selling, offering
for sale or even stocking infringing VCDs, would infringe the exclusive
rights of the plaintiff.
10.10.Furthermore, an examination of the frame lengths by Mr. K.R.
Ramakrishnan, Professor, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, whose
technical affidavit has been filed by the plaintiff, shows that the defendants
were infringing the suit patent.
10.11.Moreover, it was also discovered during the technical examination that
the defendants‟ audio coding was such that the average of number of packets
transmitted using the two different types of frames came out to be
substantially equal to „P‟, which was also in accordance with Claim 1 of the
suit patent.
10.12.Additionally, the padding bit in the frame in defendants‟ VCD was set
to ‗on‘ only in Type II frames, thereby, indicating that the frame contained
padding bits. This is explained in Claim 2 of the plaintiff‟s suit patent. Thus,
it is clear that the audio streams of the defendants‟ VCDs are compressed
according to the scheme as disclosed in the plaintiff‟s Patent No. 175971,
and thereby, clearly infringes the suit patent.
10.13.The aforesaid analysis is indicative of the infringement of the suit
patent, and therefore, the plaintiff has discharged its burden of proof under
the Patents Act. The defendants have failed to rebut the results of the
technical affidavit and have merely stated that technique of production on the
basis of the selected data copied from the end product to hard disc for
analysis is wrong. This is incorrect as it is not the technique of manufacture
of the VCD, but the digital data on the VCD that plays a role.
10.14.Defendants‟ claim that suit patent claims rights in a system, not
method, and therefore, plaintiff cannot claim infringement as anyone can use
the method, is completely baseless. Defendants have themselves failed to
provide any cogent proof or evidence in support that the process and the
technology used by them is different from the plaintiff‟s technology under
the suit patent, which is also evident from the cross-examination of
defendant no. 1, wherein, he has given vague responses in respect of the raw
material used by them and the technology employed to replicate VCDs.
10.15.It is settled law that if the defendants refuse to furnish the particulars
of the process, the Court can draw adverse inference and invoke Section
104A of the Patents Act and in case of a process patent, the Court can direct
the defendants to disclose the process used by it, in order to prove that there
is no infringement.
10.16.The claim of the defendants that there is presence of better
compression technology is also irrelevant as the suit patent covers a part of
ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard which is mandatorily used while replicating
VCDs and the same makes the suit patent a Standard Essential Patent
(“SEP”). The ISO/IEC standard, which defines rules of compression and
decompression, has not changed since 1992. Therefore, even if better
technology is available, it cannot be used.
10.17.Furthermore, the specifications for the VCD have been defined in the
year 1992, vide Video CD specification version 1.0, and have been updated
in 1995 vide Video CD specification version 2.0. Both versions 1.0 and 2.0
refer to the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard and define the rules for compression
and decompression of audio. The subject matter of the suit patent is identical
to certain parts of the ISO/IEC 11172-3 and therefore, the contention of the
defendants that the suit patent is obsolete, is incorrect.
10.18.The suit patent is used in the MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 audio
compression/expansion systems standardized in the ISO/IEC 11172-3
standard. A VCD manufactured by using an audio compression technology
outside the scope of these standards will not play on a VCD player.
10.19.There is no other way permitted to pack data. The ISO/IEC 11172-3
standard (Ex. PW1/45) incorporates the plaintiff‟s technology of the suit
patent, in the following manner: -
 Clause C.1.5.1.10 of ISO/IEC 11172-3 states that each frame consists
of 384 samples and so frame rate is Fs/384. As indicated in the
specification, number of samples ns of the wide-band signal is 384.
 The length of a slot as mentioned in ISO/IEC 11172-3 in Layer I is 32
bits. As indicated in the specification, N is the number of bits in each
information packet and N =32.
 As per ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard, the number of slots in a frame can
be compounded by the formula:

12 is actually ns/N, i.e., 384/32 and thus can also be written as: -

This formula matches the formula indicated in the specification being:
 As per ISO/IEC 11172-3, if this does not give an integer, the result is
truncated and padding is required. This means that the number of slots
may vary between „N‟ or „N+1‟. The same is the core of the invention
of the suit patent and is indicated in the specification.
10.20.The defendants have infringed the rights of the plaintiff vested in the
suit patent, firstly, by sourcing/arranging for the manufacture of infringing
stampers, being discs from which at least 25,000 CDs can be manufactured.
The said stampers are all encoded based on the technology flowing from the
suit patent. Secondly, by manufacturing/replicating VCDs based upon the
said stampers and selling the said VCDs to various parties.
10.21.The action of the defendants to use the replication machinery for
manufacturing the VCDs also amounts to infringement. The same is clear
from the fact that the manufacturers of the replication equipment, while
selling replication equipments to parties/replicators such as the defendants,
clearly put them on notice that separate license may be required under
patents ―covering the signal format for the information stored on the discs‖.
Therefore, the defendants would be aware being put to notice of the
requirement of sourcing licenses from patent holders such as the plaintiff.
10.22.Singulus, from which the defendants had licensed the technology for
replication, had put the defendants on notice that a separate license may be
required for the patents covering the signal format for the information stored
in the discs. Even Clause 17 (i) of the sample agreement from Optical Disc
Mastering Eindhoven (“ODME”), is clearly evident of the aforesaid.
10.23.Furthermore, in terms of a letter dated 14th September, 2004 from
Singulus to the plaintiff, the company has clarified that in all its sales
contracts with respect to replication machines, Singulus specifies to its
customers, that all approvals/third-party consents are necessary prior to use
of the said machinery, as Singulus does not guarantee that the use of the said
machinery will not cause infringement/damage to a third-party. Additionally,
when a question in relation to the aforesaid was put to the defendant no. 1 in
his cross-examination, he had stated that he did not have a copy of the
agreement with Singulus and, at the same time, had denied that any clause of
the separate license or letter was written to the defendants by Singulus.
10.24.Even if the defendants are using replication technique licensed by
Singulus, the same is immaterial as replication technique has nothing to do
with the audio compression or decompression. However, what is material is
that the replication of the VCDs unavoidably results in discs which comprise
audio that has been compressed using the plaintiff‟s patented technology.
10.25.The reference of defendants to the list of equipment for replication to
make discs to state that they are not infringing, is irrelevant as any type of
pre-recorded disc, such as, CD-Audio, several types of CD-ROMs and
VCDs, can be made on this replication line.
10.26.Reading of the suit patent makes it apparent that the suit patent has a
system claim, which includes a transmitter, a transmission medium and a
receiver. The transmission medium can be amongst a broadcast signal, a
magnetic tape, an optical disc, as in the present case, etc.
10.27.In cases where the transmission medium is an optical disc, the
transmitter is the chain of professional mastering equipment, which makes
Master Discs upon receipt of a master tape or disc recorded with digital data
input, including, audio files prepared by electronics for audio compression,
or stamper manufacturing equipment, which make stampers by use of the
Master Disc and replication equipment to replicate video and audio files on a
VCD. Whereas, the receiver in case of an optical disc is a VCD player,
which includes electronics for audio decompression. Thus, manufacture of
VCDs is nothing but the transmission of compressed audio files.
10.28. Defendants have already admitted that the plaintiff‟s activities are
based on standard terms worldwide in their letter dated 12th January, 2004,
by noting that, ―We do not dispute that your licensing activities are based on
standard terms and conditions worldwide.‖
10.29.The fact that plaintiff‟s licensing activities have been questioned in a
Court in the United States is irrelevant.
10.30.The stand of the defendants that the plaintiff is subjecting defendants
into unjustified compulsory licensing and allowing the burden of the
increased prices of the VCD to fall upon the Indian consumers, is also
unjustified as the license is voluntary and price is fixed at standard rates
worldwide.
10.31.Apart from compensatory damages, defendants are also liable to pay
punitive damages, keeping in mind not just their infringing use of plaintiff‟s
patented technology, but also their conduct of refusing to hand over
documents during the local commission, in terms of the order passed in CCP
No. 135/2004.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANTS:
11. The submissions, put forth by the defendants, are as follows:
11.1. The present suit deserves to be dismissed at the outset under the
provisions of Order I Rules 3 and 9, read with Order VII Rule 11(d) of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (“CPC”). The technique of replication
employed by the defendants, in no way, involves the mechanism given in
Claim 1 or Claim 2 of the suit patent. It is the producers of the movies, or the
manufacturers of the stampers, who are the necessary parties and without
whom the process of infringement of the suit patent cannot be ascertained.
11.2. The film producers give a prior undertaking/bond that they are the
legal owners of the CD/VCD and have all the requisite licenses associated
with it. The defendants cannot make, alter, add, delete or modify the Master
CDs supplied by the producers. Thus, it becomes an admitted fact that the
transmission of information to the original Master CD, from which the
VCDs are made, is not done at the end of the defendants, rather, the
infringement, if any, takes place at the end of the film producers.
Accordingly, the film producers are a necessary party in the present suit.
11.3. Therefore, being an admitted fact that no mechanism of infringement
of suit patent is being followed by the defendants, the necessary party in the
suit has to be the producer with whom it is alleged that a mechanism of
infringement of the suit patent exists.
11.4. The suit, as filed, is nothing but an attempt of the plaintiff to legally
blackmail and fleece manufacturers in developing countries, like the
defendants.
11.5. The Master Discs are provided by the film producers who give
undertaking that the said VCDs are their exclusive property and that the
defendants had the license to replicate the film in the VCDs provided by the
film producers and the VCDs sold by the defendants complied with all the
requisite permissions. Furthermore, the technique of replication does not
involve any system of transmission or digital compression, and the
defendants did not use any technique to convert the signal format for the
information stored on the discs.
11.6. The technology suggested for signal compression by the suit patent is
absolutely obsolete and far superior technologies are available for the
manufacture, transmission and compression of data and for synchronisation
of the information signals. Plaintiff and its pool have developed far superior
technologies for digital transmission. Additionally, some of the leading
companies in the market are Seagate Technologies, LLC (US Patent No.
6,564,292), Cirrus Logic, Inc. (US Patent No. 6,754,618), Pioneer
Corporation (US Patent No. 6,742,062), Sony Corporation (US Patent No.
6,658,056), Hitachi Ltd. (US Patent No. 5,903,704), etc., and all the said
technologies are compatible with the VCD players available in the market.
11.7. Defendants, in the whole process of replication, do not use any
software or hardware for digital transmission and compression of
information and the technique used by the defendants for replication is
licensed from the German company – Singulus. The defendants use their
machine called “Automatic CD manufacturing system Skyline with one
moulding machine” (“Skyline”). The Skyline is controlled through one
Siemens PLC type S7 and one software of Mitsubishi and interfaces with a
Singulus proprietary visualization package based on Microsoft Windows
2000 as a man-machine interface.
11.8. The suit patent relates to a digital transmission system comprising of a
transmitter and a receiver, for transmitting a wide-band digital signal.
However, the technology used by the defendants for replication of CD/VCD
does not involve any such mechanism. Additionally, in the entire process, no
external software/technique for digital compression is involved.
11.9. The plaintiff has relied upon a technical affidavit of one Mr. K.R.
Ramakrishnan for evidencing the factum of infringement, however, the very
base of the report relied upon is defective and erroneous as the whole process
is based on the data copied from a VCD to a hard disc. Therefore, to judge
the technique of production on the basis of the selected data copied from the
end product to hard disc and to comment on its source itself, is scientifically
incorrect.
11.10.Instead of analysing the allegedly infringing equipment that was
readily available, the plaintiff chose to adopt a circuitous argument that since
the defendants‟ equipment created VCDs, and VCDs were covered by an
alleged standard, and further, since the plaintiff‟s patent corresponds to those
standards, the patent has been infringed. None of the facts sought to be
established by the plaintiff, even by its own circuitous logic, demonstrate the
presence of a transmitter or a receiver, both of which are critical components
to establish infringement of the suit patent.
11.11.Merely because the format of the data analyzed in the VCD is as per
the suit patent, there is no prima facie evidence that the defendants use the
compression technique disclosed in the suit patent. Even the report of Mr.
K.R. Ramakrishnan does not mention whether it is the VCD or the data
therein that infringes Claims 1 or 2 of the patent.
11.12.To arrive at the conclusions pertaining to the „transmitter‟ and the
„receiver‟ used for recording, on the basis of the storage medium, is
scientifically incorrect and subject to high errors. Plaintiff has failed to show
even on a reading of the Court record that the suit patent for a „system‟
which has a „transmitter‟ and „receiver‟, is contained in the relevant standard,
let alone mapping the suit patent to the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard.
11.13.Further, the plaintiff has failed to plead in its plaint or lead evidence
based on a ‗Claim Versus Product‘ analysis. The plaintiff has deliberately
avoided pleading or leading evidence on the construction of the claims of the
suit patent, even though such an analysis is fundamental to a suit for
infringement.
11.14.Correct test for patent infringement is to map the defendant‟s product
against the plaintiff‟s patent claims. Accordingly, Claim 1 of the suit patent
must have been mapped by the plaintiff to the defendants‟ product, in order
to establish infringement. However, the plaintiff has not carried out the said
exercise.
11.15.Furthermore, the concluding part of the report of Mr. K.R.
Ramakrishnan has been very clearly worded as the said conclusion does not
mention that there exists any system/article/hardware that infringes Claim 1
of the suit patent. Nowhere does the conclusion talk about any infringing
system/article that may have been used by the defendants. The conclusion
only says that the method/scheme for compression is the same as disclosed
in the suit patent. Patent specifications may contain several methods, or even
prior art, and what ultimately gets protected is the claim in the patent.
Therefore, even if it is assumed that the scheme of packing data is same in
VCDs, it does not mean that any system/apparatus exists with the
defendants, that infringes Claim 1 and Claim 2 of the suit patent.
11.16.Since, the process of replication does not require any transmission or
compression mechanism, particularly, with an old patent pertaining to the
year 1990, therefore, plaintiff is not entitled to charge any royalty for the
alleged infringement of the suit patent. However, plaintiff, along with its
pool of companies, indulges in such malpractice to pressurize the
manufacturers like the defendants to pay hefty royalty fee irrespective of
whether such manufacturers use the plaintiff‟s technique or not.
11.17.Furthermore, the entire alleged E-mail correspondence between the
plaintiff and the defendants never mentioned the rights pertaining to the
infringed patent in the suit and was referring to the pool of patents held by
the plaintiff and other companies.
11.18.While there is no issue framed on SEPs, the plaintiff relies on some
alleged standards and claims to establish the alleged infringement by way of
the indirect method. In the present case, the plaint is based on a single patent,
whereas, in most SEP cases, there are a „handful of representative patents‟.
Admittedly, the plaintiff has not produced in evidence any such voluntary
Fair, Reasonable and Non-Discriminatory (“FRAND”) declaration to any
Standard Setting Organization (“SSO”).
11.19.In order to prove that the plaintiff‟s rates are FRAND and that the
royalty rates offered by them are genuine, no comparative licenses have been
placed on record. In the cross-examination, one of the witnesses of the
plaintiff stated that royalty rates and other license agreements are available
on their website. It is an admitted case that the plaintiff has more than one
patent in relation to VCDs and it offers a pool of patents for licenses.
Further, there is no known principle of law that permits a plaintiff to avoid
proving its case by relying on materials not proved. As per Section 57 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (“Evidence Act”), the Court can refuse to take
judicial notice of the documents which are not produced before the Court.
Therefore, the failure of the plaintiff to prove the royalty rate is fatal to its
claim for damages.
11.20.The plaintiff is barred under Section 23 of the Evidence Act from
relying upon the settlement correspondence between the parties. On a perusal
of the correspondence, it is clear that the defendants were entertaining the
correspondence only because of the repeated threatening communications,
and to buy peace. The negotiation that took place on the rate of royalty,
occurred with respect to the patent pool, and without the defendants actually
knowing which patent or patents was/were being offered to license and what
were the terms of the license agreement. Therefore, the evidence of the
correspondence is both inadmissible and irrelevant to the issue of
infringement of the suit patent.
11.21.Moreover, the plaintiff is not entitled to the relief of rendition of
accounts and damages as it has admitted that several patents exist in the
VCD technology.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COURT:
12. The present suit, which was initially filed in the year 2004, was
subsequently renumbered in the year 2018, as a commercial suit. Issues were
framed on 07th January, 2005 and the cross examination in the matter was
concluded on 17th July, 2010.
13. During the pendency of the present proceedings, the plaintiff company
underwent a change of name from Philips Electronics N.V. to Koninklijke
Philips Electronics N.V. on 15th May, 2013. Accordingly, upon an application
filed on behalf of the plaintiff, order dated 27th August, 2014 was passed
allowing amendment in the Memo of Parties, pursuant to which, amended
Memo of Parties recording the change of name of the plaintiff, was brought
on record.
ISSUE-WISE FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS:
Issue No. 1: Whether the plaint has been instituted, signed and verified
by a duly authorised person -- O.P.P.
14. The present suit has been instituted by Mr. Farokh N. Bhiwandiwalla
on behalf of the plaintiff, who has signed and verified the plaint. He has been
examined as a witness in the present suit and has tendered his affidavit in
evidence on 31st October, 2006, exhibited as Ex. PW2/A, wherein, he has
identified his signature on the plaint.
15. As regards the authority of Mr. Farokh N. Bhiwandiwalla, in para 1 of
the plaint, it has been stated as follows:
―1. The Plaintiff is a company incorporated under the Laws of
Netherlands and has its principal place of business at
Groenewoudseweg 1, 5621BA Eindhoven, the Netherlands. The
Plaintiff was formerly known· as N.V Philips Gloeilampenfabrieken
prior to changing its name to Philips Electronics N.V. Subsequently,
the Plaintiff underwent another name change to Koninklijke Philips
Electronics N.V. Mr. Farokh N Bhiwandiwalla is the constituted
attorney of the Plaintiff. Mr. Bhiwandiwalla is authorized by and
under a power of attorney executed in his favour to sign & verify the
pleadings and institute the present suit.‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
16. The aforesaid fact is also reiterated in para 2 of Ex. PW2/A, i.e.,
Evidence Affidavit of Mr. Farokh N. Bhiwandiwalla, as follows:
―2. I state that I have been handling the Plaintiff‘s licensing
activities in India since 1999. I state that I have access to the
relevant records of my company and am fully familiar and
conversant with the facts of this case and thus am able to depose this
affidavit. I state that I am the constituted attorney in this matter and
am duly authorized to institute the proceedings as well as to sign and
verify the pleadings in this matter. I state thus that I have signed the
Plaint in this matter which signatures I identify as being my
signatures on the Plaint, which are, indicated as marks A & B. A
power of attorney authorizing me i.e. Farokh N. Bhiwandiwalla to
act for the Plaintiff Company i.e. to institute legal proceedings as
well as to sign and verify pleadings is already filed in the
proceedings and the same may be exhibited accordingly as ExPW2/1. A copy is attached herewith for convenience‘s sake. I say that my
power to institute the instant proceedings, sign and verify the
pleadings may be traced to the powers accruing in favour of Mr.
Ruud J. Peters of the Plaintiff Company. I say that the appropriate
authorization flowing from the Plaintiff Company to Mr. Peters is
already filed in the proceedings and may also be exhibited
accordingly as ExPW-2/2. A copy is attached herewith for
convenience‘s sake.‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
17. Thus, as per the documents on record, the aforesaid Mr. Farokh N.
Bhiwandiwalla is duly authorised to institute, sign and verify the present suit
by virtue of legalized and notarized Power of Attorney dated 03
rd May, 2004
executed in his favour by Mr. Rudd J. Peters, Ex. PW1/1. Further, Mr. Rudd
J. Peters has been authorized on behalf of the plaintiff to represent the
plaintiff at law by way of substitution. Reference in this regard may be made
to Ex. PW1/2.
18. In view of the aforesaid, Issue No. 1 is decided in favour of the
plaintiff.
Issue No. 2: Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties,
if so, to what effect -- O.P.D.
19. The present suit has been filed by the plaintiff alleging infringement of
its suit patent by the defendants. It is the case of the defendants that the
defendants are only replicating from the Master Discs. Therefore, as per the
defendants, the producers of the movies or the manufacturers of the
stampers, are the necessary parties, who ought to have been impleaded in the
suit. Further, the defendants also raised the objection that they had purchased
the device for replicating the VCDs from the company Singulus, which has
not been made a party to the present suit.
20. The plaintiff, in order to establish infringement by the defendants, was
required to show that the original Master Discs, from which the replication
was being done, packed information as per the suit patent, i.e., were packed
with compressed audio using the system protected by the suit patent. The
plaintiff could have done so by leading independent evidence, for which,
impleadment of the producers of the movies or the manufacturers of the
stampers, was not necessary.
21. As regards the act of replication being done by the defendants, the
plaintiff has taken contradictory stands. One case put forward by the plaintiff
is that the act of replication by the defendants did not involve the act of
compression/decompression of data/audio signals. On the other hand, it is
the case of the plaintiff that infringement is in the manufacture and
replication of VCDs and that by using the Singulus machine and creating the
VCDs, the defendants have caused infringement. However, the plaintiff was
in its full authority to establish by means of independent evidence that the
defendants‟ act of replication of VCDs, led to infringement of the suit patent.
Therefore, the impleadment of the company Singulus, was not necessary.
22. Furthermore, the onus to prove the non-joinder of necessary parties
was on the defendants. Such onus has to be discharged not in a vague
manner, but with specific averments and cogent evidence for the Court to
reach the conclusion that the parties, as claimed by the defendants, are
necessary parties. In the present case, the defendants have not discharged the
said burden. Reference in this regard may be made to the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Laxmishankar Harishankar Bhatt Versus
Yashram Vasta (Dead) By LRs1
, as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
11. A careful reading of above clearly discloses that there is no clear
averment as to who are the co-owners and what exactly is the nature of
right claimed by them. A vague statement of this character, in our
considered opinion, could hardly be sufficient to non-suit the appellant
on the ground of non-joinder of parties. We are unable to comprehend
as to how the trial court had come to the conclusion that the executants
of the sale deed dated February 12, 1968 could not pass a full title when
it itself points out that the shares of the other co-owners were not known.
Maybe the appellant took the stand that it was not necessary to implead
others but that does not mean the appellant is liable to be non-suited.
The stand of the appellant is consistent with his case that he has come
to acquire the entire ownership of the suit property. Therefore, the
courts should have insisted on some material or record as to the
existence of other co-owners and their rights pertaining to suit
properties. In juxtaposition to revenue record, there must be some
worthwhile evidence for the court to conclude that there are other coowners. Genealogical tree filed along with the written statement cannot
point to the existence of co-owners without specific evidence in this
regard. Such an evidence is totally lacking in this case. Therefore, we
find it equally impossible to accept the finding of the High Court when
it endorsed the view of the trial court in this regard. Accordingly, we
conclude that in the absence of a specific finding as to whether there
are other co-owners and how they are necessary parties, the suit could
not have been dismissed for non-joinder of necessary parties. On this
conclusion, we think it is unnecessary to go into the legal aspect as to
whether in the absence of other co-owners, one co-owner could maintain
a suit.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
23. Accordingly, Issue No. 2 is decided against the defendants.

1
(1993) 3 SCC 49.
Issue No. 3: Whether the plaintiff is the proprietor of Patent No. 175971
and whether the same is a subsisting patent -- O.P.P.
24. As per the documents on record, the suit patent dated 28th May, 1990,
was granted to the plaintiff on 12th September, 1997 and was in force at the
time of filing of the present suit. Certified copy of the patent registration
certificate for Indian Patent No. 175971 and its complete specification, are
on record as Ex. PW1/6, which state that the plaintiff is the grantee. Certified
copy of the entry of suit patent in the Register of Patents is on record, as Ex.
PW1/7.
25. The suit patent was subsisting through its term, which has already
expired on 28th May, 2010, during the course of the present proceedings. The
defendants have not challenged the validity of the suit patent and the same is
not an issue before this Court.
26. The present issue is decided accordingly in favour of the plaintiff.
Issue No. 4: In case issue No. 3 is proved in the affirmative, whether the
technique used by the defendant infringes Indian Patent No. 175971 --
O.P.P.
Issue No. 5: Whether there are already different and better-known
techniques available that do digital transmission of data and, therefore,
negate Indian Patent No. 175971 -- O.P.D.
Issue No. 6: Whether the defendant is using a unique technique as
claimed by him, if so, to what effect -- O.P.D.
27. The suit patent pertains to a single patent bearing No. IN175971 for a
„Digital Transmission System‟, which is dated 28th May, 1990, and expired
on 28th May, 2010. The bibliographic details of the suit patent, are as
follows:
Claim Construction:
28. For determining infringement of the suit patent, the Court is primarily
required to construct the relevant claims of the suit patent to understand the
scope of the suit patent and, thereafter, to determine whether the impugned
product of the defendants is covered by it.
29. For the construction of the claims of a patent, consideration of the
complete specification of the patent is paramount. The detailed description of
the invention, as provided in the complete specification of the patent,
underscores the features of a patent. In this regard, reference may be made to
the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Bishwanath
Prasad Radhey Shyam Versus Hindustan Metal Industries2
, wherein, on
the aspect of claim construction, it has been held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
43. As pointed out in Arnold v. Bradbury [(1871) 6 Ch A 706] the
proper way to construe a specification is not to read the claims first and
then see what the full description of the invention is, but first to read
the description of the invention, in order that the mind may be prepared

2
(1979) 2 SCC 511.
for what it is, that the invention is to be claimed, for the patentee
cannot claim more than he desires to patent. In Parkinson v. Simon
[(1894) 11 RPC 483] Lord Esher, M.R. enumerated that as far as
possible the claims must be so construed as to give an effective
meaning to each of them, but the specification and the claims must be
looked at and construed together.
44. The learned trial Judge precisely followed this method of
construction. He first construed and considered the description of the
invention in the provisional and complete specifications and then dealt
with each of the claims, individually. Thereafter, he considered the claims
and specifications as a whole, in the light of the evidence on record.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
30. The law is settled that claims have to be given their ordinary and
general meaning from the perspective of a person of ordinary skill in the art.
In case of any doubt as to what a claim means, resort can be had to the
specification, which would aid in ascertaining the true intent and meaning of
the language employed in the claims. Thus, in the case of F. Hoffmann-La
Roche Ltd. & Anr. Versus Cipla Ltd.3
, it has been held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
33. Before we apply the aforenoted legal position to the facts of the
instant case we need to discuss the legal position concerning
construction of claims. In the decision reported as AIR 1969 BOMBAY
255 FH & B v. Unichem Laboratories it was held that specifications end
with claims, delimiting the monopoly granted by the patent and that the
main function of a Court is to construe the claims without reference to
the specification; a reference to the specification being as an exception if
there was an ambiguity in the claim. Claims must be read as ordinary
English sentences without incorporating into them extracts from body of
specification or changing their meaning by reference to the language
used in the body of the specification. In a recent decision in FAO (OS)
No. 190/2013 Merck v. Glenmark the Division Bench held that claim
construction to determine the coverage in the suit patent has to be
determined objectively on its own terms with regard to the words used by
the inventor and the context of the invention in terms of the knowledge
existing in the industry. Abandonment of an application cannot remove

3
2015 SCC OnLine Del 14738.
what is patented earlier nor can it include something that was excluded
earlier and that a patent is construed by the terms used by the inventor
and not the inventors subjective intent as to what was meant to be
covered. Merely because an inventor applies for a latter patent that is
already objectively included in a prior patent, but which inventor
subjectively feels needs a separate patent application, doesn't mean it is
to be taken at face value and therefore neither Section 3(d) or
abandonment of subsequent patent application can be used to read into
terms of prior application, which has to be construed on its own terms.
In the decision reported as 415 F. 3d 1303 Edward H. Phillips v. AWH
Corporation it was held that claims have to be given their ordinary and
general meaning and it would be unjust to the public, as well as would
be an evasion of the law, to construe a claim in a manner different
from plain import of the terms and thus ordinary and customary
meaning of the claim term is the meaning of the term to a Person of
Ordinary Skill in the Art as of effective date of filing of the patent
application. In case of any doubt as to what a claim means, resort can
be had to the specification which will aid in solving or ascertaining the
true intent and meaning of the language employed in the claims and
for which the court can consider patent prosecution history in order to
understand as to how the inventor or the patent examiner understood
the invention. The Court recognized that since prosecution is an ongoing
process, it often lacks clarity of the specification and thus is less useful
for claim construction. The Court also recognizes that having regard to
extrinsic evidence such as inventor testimony, dictionaries and treaties
would be permissible but has to be resorted to with caution because
essentially extrinsic evidence is always treated as of lesser significance in
comparison with intrinsic evidence. In the decision reported as 457 F.3.
1284 (United States) Pfizer v. Ranbaxy the Court held that the statements
made during prosecution of foreign applications are irrelevant as they
are in response to unique patentability requirements overseas. The Court
also held that the statement made in later unrelated applications cannot
be used to interpret claims of prior patent. In the decision reported as
1995 RPC 255 (UK) Glaverbel SA v. British Coal Corp the Court held
that a patent is construed objectively, through the eyes of a skilled
addressee. The Court also held that the whole document must be read
together, the body of specification with the claims. But if claim is clear
then monopoly sought by patentee cannot be extended or cut down by
reference to the rest of the specification and the subsequent conduct is
not available to aid the interpretation of a written document.
34. For the above conspectus, pithily put, principles of claim
construction could be summarized as under : -
(i) Claims define the territory or scope of protection (Section 10(4)(c)
of the Patents Act, 1970.
(ii) There is no limit to the number of claims except that after ten
claims there is an additional fee per claim (1st Schedule of the Act).
(iii) Claims can be independent or dependent.
(iv) The broad structure of set of claims is an inverted pyramid with
the broadest at the top and the narrowest at the bottom (Manual of
Patents Office - Practice and procedure).
(v) Patent laws of various countries lay down rules for drafting of
claims and these rules are used by Courts while interpreting claims.
(vi) One rule is that claims are a single sentence defining an invention
or an inventive concept.
(vii) Different claims define different embodiments of same inventive
concept.
(viii) The first claim is a parent or mother claim while remaining
claims are referred to as subsidiary claims.
(ix) If subsidiary claims contain an independent inventive concept
different from the main claim then the Patent office will insist on the
filing of a divisional application.
(x) Subject matter of claims can be product, substances, apparatus or
articles; alternatively methods or process for producing said
products etc. They may be formulations, mixtures of various substance
including recipes. Dosage regimes or in some countries methods of
use or treatment may also be claimed.
(xi) Where claims are ‗dependent‘ it incorporates by reference
‗everything in the parent claim, and adds some further statement,
limitations or restrictions‘. (Landis on Mechanics of Patent Claim
Drafting).
(xii) Where claims are ‗independent‘ although relating to the same
inventive concept this implies that the ‗independent claim stands
alone, includes all its necessary limitations, and is not dependent
upon and does not include limitations from any other claim to make
it complete …. An independent Claim can be the broadest scope
claim. It has fewer limitations than any dependent claim which is
dependent upon it‘. (Landis on Mechanics of Patent Claim Drafting)
(xiii) For someone wishing to invalidate a patent the said person must
invalidate each claim separately and independently as it is quite likely
that some claims may be valid even while some are invalid.
(xiv) At the beginning of an infringement action the Courts in the
United States conduct what is known as a ‗Markman hearing‘ to
define the scope of the claims or to throw light on certain ambiguous
terms used in the claims. Although this is not technically done in India
but functionally most Judges will resort to a similar exercise in trying
to understand the scope and meaning of the claims including its terms.
xxx xxx xxx
79. It is therefore left to the Court to study the specification and claims
of the suit patent and note that as they are in relation to Erlotinib
Hydrochloride and are not restricted to any specific Polymorph, they
would be infringed by any manufacture of Polymorph B by a third party
as the same would use the subject matter of IN ‗774 as its basic starting
point. The Learned Single Judge has correctly applied the principle in
the decision reported as AIR 1969 Bom 255 F.H & B v. Unichem, in
stating that in case of any ambiguity of the Claim of the suit patent
then resort can be taken to the specification of the said suit patent and
nothing else. He correctly recognized that a Purposive Construction of
the claims is necessary in order to not construe claims too narrowly. Yet
we find that neither of these tests have been applied in the present case to
construct the claims themselves and hence a conclusion that the IN ‗774
patent covers Polymorphs A+B itself is erroneous.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
31. Furthermore, the High Court of Justice, Chancery Division, Patents
Court, United Kingdom, in the case of Pozzoli S.P.A. Versus B.D.M.O S.A.
and Others4
, has elucidated upon the concept of claim construction, in the
following manner:
―xxx xxx xxx
14. There is no dispute about the approach to the construction of the
patent. The principles were conveniently summarised by Jacob LJ in
Technip France SA‘s Patent [2004] RPC 46. The principles, slightly
modified by Pumfrey J in Halliburton Energy Services Inc v. Smith
International (North Sea) Ltd [2006] R.P.C. 2 at paragraph [68], are as
follows:
―(a) The first, overarching principle, is that contained in Art
69 itself. Sometimes I wonder whether people spend more
time on the gloss to Art 69, the Protocol, than to the Article
itself, even though it is the Article which is the main
governing provision.
(b) Art 69 says that the extent of protection is determined by
the terms of the claims. It goes on to say that the description
and drawings shall be used to interpret the claims. In short
the claims are to be construed in context.

4
[2006] EWHC 11398 (Ch) – Decision dated 21st June, 2006.
(c) It follows that the claims are to be construed purposively
-- the inventor's purpose being ascertained from the
description and drawings.
(d) It further follows that the claims must not be construed
as if they stood alone -- the drawings and description only
being used to resolve any ambiguity. The Protocol expressly
eschews such a method of construction but to my mind that
would be so without the Protocol. Purpose is vital to the
construction of claims.
(e) When ascertaining the inventor's purpose, it must be
remembered that he may have several purposes depending on
the level of generality of his invention. Typically, for instance,
an inventor may have one, generally more than one, specific
embodiment as well as a generalised concept. But there is no
presumption that the patentee necessarily intended the widest
possible meaning consistent with his purpose be given to the
words that he used: purpose and meaning are different.
(f) Thus purpose is not the be-all and end-all. One is still at
the end of the day concerned with the meaning of the
language used. Hence the other extreme of the Protocol--a
mere guideline--is also ruled out by Art 69 itself. It is the
terms of the claims which delineate the patentee's territory.
(g) It follows that if the patentee has included what is
obviously a deliberate limitation in his claims, it must have
a meaning. One cannot disregard obviously intentional
elements. Hoffmann LJ put it this way in STEP v. Emson
[1993] RPC at 522:
―The well known principle that patent claims are given a
purposive construction does not mean that an integer can be
treated as struck out if it does not appear to make any
difference to the inventive concept. It may have some other
purpose buried in the prior art and even if this is not
discernible, the patentee may have had some reason of his
own for introducing it.‖
(h) It also follows that where a patentee has used a word or
phrase which, acontextually, might have a particular
meaning (narrow or wide) it does not necessarily have that
meaning in context. A good example of this is the Catnic case
itself -- ' vertical' in context did not mean 'geometrically
vertical', it meant 'vertical enough to do the job' (of
supporting the upper horizontal plate). The so-called
'Protocol questions' (those formulated by Hoffmann J in
Improver v Remington [1990] FSR 181 at p.189) are of
particular value when considering the difference of
meaning between a word or phrase out of context and that
word or phrase in context. At that point the first two
Protocol questions come into play. But once one focuses on
the word in context, the Protocol question approach does
not resolve the ultimate question -- what does the word or
phrase actually mean, when construed purposively? That
can only be done on the language used, read in context.
(i) It further follows that there is no general 'doctrine of
equivalents.' Any student of patent law knows that various
legal systems allow for such a concept, but that none of them
can agree what it is or should be. Here is not the place to set
forth the myriad versions of such a doctrine. For my part I do
not think that Art. 69 itself allows for such a concept -- it says
the extent of protection shall be determined by the terms of
the claims. And so far as I can understand, the French and
German versions mean the same thing. Nor can I see how the
Protocol can create any such doctrine.
(j) On the other hand purposive construction can lead to the
conclusion that a technically trivial or minor difference
between an element of a claim and the corresponding element
of the alleged infringement nonetheless falls within the
meaning of the element when read purposively. This is not
because there is a doctrine of equivalents: it is because that
is the fair way to read the claim in context.
(k) Finally purposive construction leads one to eschew what
Lord Diplock in Catnic called (at p.243):
‗the kind of meticulous verbal analysis which lawyers are too
often tempted by their training to indulge.‘
Pedantry and patents are incompatible. In Catnic the rejected
'meticulous verbal analysis" was the argument that because
the word 'horizontal' was qualified by 'substantially' whereas
'vertical' was not, the latter must mean 'geometrically
vertical.‖‖
xxx xxx xxx
16. Mr. Mitcheson suggested that, having construed the claim, the court
could then ask itself whether a product which did not fall within the claim
because of some immaterial variant nevertheless infringed. In my
judgment this is not how the principles work. Whether a variant is or is
not immaterial is relevant to construing the claim. But once the claim has
been construed it defines the scope of the monopoly and cannot be
extended to cover things that do not fall within it. The question of
immaterial variants arises in the context of the so-called Protocol
questions. Lord Hoffmann discussed these in his speech in Kirin-Amgen
Inc v Hoechst Marion Roussel [2005] RPC 9. At para 34 he said:
―Purposive construction‖ does not mean that one is
extending or going beyond the definition of the technical
matter for which the patentee seeks protection in the claims.
The question is always what the person skilled in the art
would have understood the patentee to be using the
language of the claim to mean.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
32. In the present case, the suit patent has been described in the complete
specification, i.e., Ex. PW1/6. Upon perusal of the detailed description of the
complete specification of the suit patent, the following teachings of the suit
patent can be discerned:
32.1 The suit patent relates to the field of a digital transmission system
formed by a transmitter and a receiver, for transmitting a wide-band digital
signal of a specific sample frequency „Fs‟. The suit patent also relates to a
transmitter and a receiver for use in the transmission system, and also to the
record carrier obtained from the system. The same is described in the
detailed description of the complete specification in the following manner:
―xxx xxx xxx
Digital transmission system, transmitter and receiver for use in the
transmission system, and record, carrier obtained by means of the
transmitter in the form of a recording device.
The invention relates to a digital transmission system
comprising a transmitter and a receiver, for transmitting a wideband digital signal of a specific sample frequency Fs, for example a
digital audio signal, via a transmission medium, and for receiving
said signal, the transmitter having an input terminal for receiving
the wide-band digital signal, which input terminal is coupled to an
input of a signal source which forms part of the transmitter and
which is constructed to generate a second digital signal and supply
said signal to an output, which second digital signal comprises
consecutive frames, each frame comprising a plurality of
information packets, each information packet comprising N bits, N
being larger than 1, the receiver comprising a decoder having an
input for receiving the second digital signal, which decoder has an
output coupled to an output terminal to supply the wide-band digital
signal. The invention also relates to a transmitter and a receiver for
use in the transmission system, to a transmitter in the form of a
device for recording the second digital signal in a track on a record
carrier, to a record carrier obtained by means of the transmitter, and
to a receiver in the form of a device for reading the second digital
signal from the track on the record carrier….
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
32.2 The problem identified in the prior art (Krasner, 19805
) is that the
transmission system in the said prior art comprises a transmitter and a
receiver which employs subband coding system and subband decoding
system, respectively. This system, dependent on psychoacoustic criticalband division, has limited applications and is not suitable for using in highquality, wide bandwidth music signals. The said problems in the prior art are
described in the complete specification of the suit patent as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
…A transmission system of the type defined in the opening sentence is
known from the article ―The Critical Band Coder - Digital Encoding
of Speech signals based on the Percentual requirements of the
Auditory System" by M.E. Krasner in Proc. IEEE ICASSP 80, ―Vol. 1,
pp. 327-331, April 9-11, 1980. This article relates to a transmission
system in which the transmitter employs a subband coding system
and the receiver employs a corresponding subband decoding system,
but the invention is not limited to such a coding system, as will
become apparent hereinafter.
In the system known from said publication the speech signal
band is divided into a plurality of subbands whose bandwidth
approximately corresponds to the bandwidths of the critical bands of
the human ear in the respective frequency ranges (cf. Fig. 2 in the
article of Krasner). This division has been selected because on the
ground of psycho-acoustic experiments it is forseeeable that the

5
“The Critical Band Coder - Digital Encoding of Speech signals based on the Percentual requirements of
the Auditory System” by M.E. Krasner in Proc. IEEE ICASSP 80, Vol. 1, pp. 327-331, April 9-11, 1980.
quantisation noise in such a subband will be masked to an optimum
extent by the signals in this subband if in the quantisation allowance
is made for the noise-masking curve of the human ear (this curve
gives the threshold value for noise masking in a critical band by a
single tone in the centre of the critical band, cf. Fig. 3 in the article
by Krasner).
In the case of a high-quality digital music signal, which in
conformity with the Compact Disc Standard is represented by 16 bits
per signal sample in the case of a sample frequency of 1/T = 44.1
kHz, it is found that with a suitably selected bandwidth and a
suitably selected quantisation for the respective subbands the use of
this known subband-coding system yields quantised output signals of
the coder which can be represented by an average number of
approximately 2.5 bits per signal sample, the quality of the replica of
the music signal not differing perceptibly from that of the original
music signal in substantially all passages of substantially all kinds of
music signals.
The subbands need not necessarily correspond to the
bandwidths of the critical bands of the human ear. Alternatively, the
subbands may have other bandwidths, for example they may all have
the same bandwidth, provided that allowance is made for this in
determining the masking threshold.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
32.3 The objective of the suit patent is to solve these problems in the prior
art and provide a highly versatile transmission system. This system contains
a transmitter capable of converting wide-band digital signals of different
formats into the second digital signal. Similarly, the system also contains a
receiver capable of deriving a wide-band signal of the correct format from
said second digital signal as described in the complete specification of the
suit patent extracted below:
―xxx xxx xxx
It is an object of the invention to provide a number of steps
for the transmission system, in particular a very specific choice for
the format with which the digital wide-band signal, after conversion
into the second digital signal, can be transmitted via the
transmission medium, in such a way that a flexible and highly
versatile transmission system is obtained. This is to be understood to
mean that the transmitter should be capable of converting wideband digital signals of different formats (which formats differ inter
alia in respect of the sample frequency Fs of the wide-band digital
signal, which may have different values such as 32 kHz, 44.1 kHz
and 48 kHz, as laid down in the digital audio interface standard of
the AES and the EBU) into the second digital signal. Similarly, the
receiver should be capable of deriving a wide-band signal of the
correct format from said second digital signal. …
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
32.4 The objectives of the invention are achieved by the suit patent through
the digital transmission system, which is flexible, synchronised and achieves
slight signal delay, as detailed in the description of the complete
specification of the suit patent below:
―xxx xxx xxx
…To this end the transmission system in accordance with the
invention is characterized in that if P in the formula
is an integer, where
BR is the bit rate of the second digital signal, and ns is the number of
samples of the wideband digital signal whose corresponding
information, which belongs to the second digital signal, is included in
one frame of the second digital signal, the number of information
packets B in one frame is P, and in that, if P is not an integer, the
number of information packets in a number of the frames is P', P'
being the next lower integer following P, and the number of
information packets in the other frames is equal to P'+1 so as to
exactly comply with the requirement that the average frame rate of
the second digital signal should be substantially equal to FS/ns and
that a frame should comprise at least a first frame portion including
the synchronising information. The purpose of dividing the frames
into B information packets is that for a wide-band digital signal of
an arbitrary sample frequency Fs the average frame rate of the
second digital signal transmitted by the transmitter is now such that
the duration of a frame in the second digital signal corresponds to
the duration occupied by nS samples of the wide-band signal.
Moreover, this enables the synchronisation to be maintained on an
information-packet basis, which is simpler and more reliable than
maintaining the synchronisation on a bit basis. Thus, in those cases
where P is not an integer, the transmitter is capable, at instants at
which this possible and also necessary, to provide a frame with P‘
+1
instead of P‘ information blocks, so that the average frame rate of
the second digital signal can be maintained equal to Fs/ns. Since in
this case the spacing between the synchronising information
(synchronising signals or synchronising words) included in the first
frame portion of succeeding frames is also an integral multiple of
the length of an information packet it remains possible to maintain
the synchronisation on an information packet basis preferably, the
first frame portion further contains information related to the
number of information packets in a frame. In a frame comprising B
information packets this information may be equal to the value B.
This means that this information corresponds to P‘ for frames
comprising P‘ information packets and to P‘+1 for frames
comprising P‘+1 information packets. Another possibility is that this
information corresponds to P' for all frames, regardless of whether
a frame comprises P' or P'+1 information packets. The additionally
inserted (P'+1)th information packet may comprise for example
merely "zeros". In that case this information packet does not·
contain any useful information. Of course, the additional
information packet may also be filled with useful information. The
first frame portion may further comprise system information. This
may include the sample frequency Fs of the wide-band digital signal
applied to the transmitter, copy-protection codes, the type of wideband digital signal applied to the transmitter, such as a stereo-audio
signal or a mono-audio signal, or a digital signal comprising two
substantially independent audio signals. However, other system
information is also possible, as will become apparent hereinafter.
Including the system information makes it possible for the receiver
to be also flexible and enables the received second digital signal to
be correctly reconverted into the wide-band digital-signal. The
second and the third frame portions of a frame contain signal
information. The transmitter may comprise a coder comprising
signal-splitting means responsive to the wide-band digital signal to
generate a second digital signal in the form of a number of M
subsignals, M being larger than 1, and comprising means for
quantising the respective sub signals. For this purpose an arbitrary
transform coding, such as the fast Fourier transform (FFT) may be
used. In that case the transmission system is characterized in that
the second frame portion of a frame contains allocation information
which, for at least a number of sub signals, indicates the number of
bits representing the samples of the quantised subsignals derived
from said subsignals, and in that the third frame portion contains
the samples of at least said quantised subsignals (if present). At the
receiving end it is then necessary to apply an inverse transform
coding, for example an inverse Fourier transform (IFFT), to
recover the wideband digital signal. The transmission system, in
which the signal-splitting means take the form of analysis-filter
means responsive to the wide-band digital signal to generate a
number of M subband signals, which analysis-filter means divide
the signal band of the wide-band digital signal, using a samplefrequency reduction, into successive subbands having band numbers
m increasing with the frequency, and in which the quantisation
means are adapted to quantise the respective subband signals block
by block, is a system employing subband coding as described above.
Such a transmission system is characterized further in that for at
least a number of the subband signals the allocation information in
the second frame portion of a frame specifies the number of bits
representing the samples of the quantised subband signals derived
from said subband signals and in that the third frame portion
contains the samples of at least said quantised subband signals (if
present. This means in fact that the allocation information is
inserted in a frame before the samples. This allocation information
is needed to enable the continuous serial bit stream of the samples in
the third frame portion to be subdivided into the various individual
samples of the correct number of bits at the receiving end. The
allocation information may require that all samples are represented
by a fixed number of bits per subband per frame. This is referred to
as a transmitter based on fixed or static bit allocation. The allocation
informaion may also imply that a number of bits variable in time is
used for the samples in a subband. This is referred to as a
transmitter based on the system of adaptive or dynamic bit
allocation. Fixed and adaptive bit allocation are described inter alia
in the publication "Low bit-rate coding of high quality audio
signals. An introduction to the MASCAM system‖ by G. Theile et al,
EBU Technical Review, No. 230 (August 1988). Inserting the
allocation information in a frame before the samples in a frame has
the advantage that at the receiving end a simpler decoding becomes
possible, which can be carried out in real time and which produces
only a slight signal delay. As a result of this sequence it is no longer
necessary to first store all the information in the third frame portion
in a memory in the receiver. Upon arrival of the second digital
signal the allocation information is stored in a memory in the
receiver. Information content of the allocation information is much
smaller than the information content of the samples in the third
frame portion, so that a substantially smaller store capacity is
needed than in the case that all the samples would have to be stored
in the receiver. Immediately upon arrival of the serial data stream of
the samples in the third frame portion this data stream can be
divided into the various samples having the number of bits specified
by the allocation information, so that no previous storage of the
signal information is necessary. The allocation information for all
the subbands can be included in a frame. However, this is not
necessary, as will become apparent hereinafter.
The transmission system may be characterized further in that
in addition the third frame portion includes information related to
scale factors, a scale factor being associated with at least one of the,
quantised subband signals contained in the third frame portion, and
in that the scale factor, information is included in the third frame
portion before the quantised subband signals. The samples can be
coded in the transmitter without, being normalised, i.e. in without
the amplitudes of a block of samples in a subband having been
divided by the amplitude of the sample having the largest amplitude
in this block. In that case no scale factors have to be transmitted. If
the samples are normalised during coding scale factor information
has to be transmitted to provide a measure of said largest amplitude.
If in this case the scale factor information is also inserted in the
third frame portion before the samples it is possible that during
reception to the scale factors to be derived from said scale
information are first stored in a memory and the samples are
multiplied immediately upon arrival, without a time delay, by the
inverse values of said scale factors. The scale factor information
may be constituted by the scale factors themselves. It is obvious that
a scale factor as inserted in the third frame portion may also be the
inverse of the amplitude of the largest sample in a block, so that in
the receiver it is not necessary to determine the inverse value and
consequently decoding can be faster. Alternatively, the values of the
scale factors may be encoded prior to insertion in the third frame
portion as scale factor information and subsequent transmission.
Moreover, it is evident that if after quantisation in the transmitter
the subband signal in a subband is zero, which obviously will be
apparent from the allocation information for the subband, no scale
factor information for this subband has to be transmitted. The
transmission system, in which the receiver comprises a decoder
comprising synthesis-filter means responsive to the respective
quantised subband signals to construct a replica of the wide-band
digital signal, which synthesis-filter means combine the subbands
applying sample-frequency increase to form the signal band of the
wide-band digital signal, may be characterized in that the samples of
the subband signals (if present) are inserted in the third frame
portion in a sequence corresponding to the sequence in Which said
samples are applied to the synthesis-filter means upon reception in
the receiver. Inserting the samples in the third frame portion in the
same sequence as that in which they are applied to the synthesisfilter means in the receiver also results in fast decoding, which again
does, not require additional storage of the samples in the receiver
before they can be further processed. Consequently, the storage
capacity required in the receiver can be limited substantially to the
storage capacity needed for the storage of the system information,
the allocation information and, if applicable, the scale factor
information. Moreover, a limited signal delay is produced, which is
mainly the result of the signal processing performed upon the
samples. The allocation information for the various quantised
subband signals is suitably inserted in the second frame portion in
the same sequence as that in which the samples of the subband
signals are included in the third frame portion. The same applies to
the sequence of the scale factors. If desired, the frames may also be
divided into four portions, the first, the second and the third frame
portion being as described hereinbefore. The last (fourth) frame
portion in the frame may the contain error-detection and/or errorcorrection information. Upon reception of this information in the
receiver it is possible to apply a correction for errors produced in the
second digital signal during transmission. As already stated, the
wide-band digital signal may be a monophonic signal. Alternatively,
the wide-band digital signal may be a stereo audio signal made up of
a first (left) and a second (right) channel component. If the
transmission system is based on a subband-coding system the
transmitter will supply subband signals each comprising a first and
a second subband-signal component, which after quantisation in the
quantisation means are converted to form first and second quantised
subband signal components. In this case the frames should also
include allocation information and scale-factor information (if the
samples have been scaled in the transmitter). The sequence is also
important here. Such a transmission system is therefore defined in
the appended Claims 11 to 15. It is obvious that the system can be
extended to handle a wide-band digital signal comprising more than
two signal components.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
33. In light of the teachings from the complete specification of the suit
patent, this Court shall now proceed to construct the sole and broadest
independent claim of the suit patent. The novel features of the suit patent are
characterized in the independent Claim 1 and are further narrowed using the
dependent Claims 2 to 17. For brevity, independent Claim 1 of the complete
specification of the suit patent, is reproduced as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
CLAIM 1:
―1. A digital transmission system comprising a transmitter and a
receiver, for transmitting a wide-band digital signal of a specific
sample frequency F, for example a digital audio signal, via a
transmission medium, and for receiving said signal, the transmitter
having an input terminal for receiving the wide-band digital signal,
which input terminal is coupled to an input of a first converter circuit
which forms part of the transmitter and which is constructed for
generating a second digital signal and supply said signal to an output,
which second digital signal comprises consecutive frames, each frame
comprising a plurality of information packets, each information
packet comprising N bits, N being larger than 1, the receiver
comprising a second converter circuit having an input for receiving
the second digital signal, which second converter circuit has an
output coupled to an output terminal to supply the wide-band digital
signal, characterized in that the first converter circuit comprises a
frame generator for generating frames including a number (B) of
information packets, the number of information packets in the
frames having a relation to a parameter P such that the number of
information packets in the frames is equal to P if P is an integer, or,
if P is not an integer, the frame generator being adapted to cyclically
generate a first number of frames and a second number of frames,
the first number of frames having a number (B) of information
packets that is equal to P‘ where P‘ is the next lower integer
preceding P, and the second number of frames having a number of
information packets that equals P‘+1, the first and the second
number being such that the average frame rate of the second digital
signal should be substantially equal to F, /n, and where the value P
equals
P=BR x ns/N x Fs
where BR is the bit rate of the second digital signal, and n, is the
number of samples of the wideband digital signal whose
corresponding information, which belongs to the second digital
signal, is included in one frame of the second digital signal, the
arrangement further comprising a synchronization information
generator for generating synchronization information and a signal
combining circuit for inserting synchronization information into a
first frame portion of the frame.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
34. The independent Claim 1 of the suit patent is in a two-part claim
format where the part followed by the term „characterised‟ is considered to
be the novel features of the Claim. In this regard, a reference can be made to
the Chapter 9 of the book, Terrell on the Law of Patents6
, titled as
“Construction of the Specification and Claims”. The relevant paras of the
said chapter are extracted below for clarity:
―xxx xxx xxx
The two-part claim format: "characterised by"
The structure of the claim itself may provide indications as to
which features are important and which might be replaced by
variants. One way in this may be done is the use of the two-part
claim format preferred by the European Patent Office. As explained
by Laddie J in Merck & Co Inc v Generics (UK) Ltd:
"Furthermore, the patentee may choose a form of language
which emphasises which features of an invention are
important and which are not. For example it is common to
find claims which start with general description followed by
'characterised in' followed by a list of features. The addressee
would appreciate that the latter features are particularly
important but the features before the words 'characterised in'
are less so. If there is a variant to the latter which obviously
does not affect the way in which the invention works, the
notional reader may be reasonably confident that the inventor
wanted to cover this variant as well. In these types of cases, the
monopoly is likely to extend to the new variant.‖
Thus it is more likely that the patent requires strict adherence to
the integers that follow the word "wherein", than to the integers that
precede it. However, it is important not to take this principle too far,
especially when considering amendments made post grant.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
35. The said rationale, that the portion of the claim following the term
„characterised‟ is considered to be the novel features of the claim, has been

6
20th Edition (2020), Thomson Reuters.
followed by a Coordinate Bench of this Court in Jay Switches India (P) Ltd.
v. Sandhar Technologies Ltd.7
36. Thus, upon constructing the independent Claim of the suit patent
along with the complete specification as a whole, it is clear that, even though
the field of the suit patent relates to the transmission system, its components
and the record carrier obtained from the system, the claims granted are
restricted to a „Digital Transmission System‟, which comprises a
„transmitter‟ and a „receiver‟, having specific structural and functional
features, such as converter circuits, frame generator and synchronization
generator. The focus of the suit patent is on the arrangement/architecture of
the components, as named above, for converting a wide-band digital signal
into frames of information packets, and as detailed in Claim 1 of the suit
patent, to achieve the claimed mode of transmission.
37. It is pertinent to note that, as per Claim 1 of the suit patent, the
characterized features to which the protection extends are to any „Digital
Transmission System‟that contains: -
I. A frame generator in the first converter circuit of the transmitter that
generates frames with a specific number of information packets (B)
depending upon the parameter P. Where P = BR × nₛ / N × Fₛ, (BR:
bit rate of second digital signal, ns
: Number of samples of the wideband signal per frame, N: Number of bits per information packet, FS =
sampling frequency of the wideband signal.)
II. A synchronisation information generator that inserts synchronisation
information into the first frame portion.

7
2024 SCC OnLine Del 8434
III. A signal combining circuit which inserts synchronisation information
into the first frame portion. This component embeds sync into the first
portion of each frame (the “syncword”).
38. Thus, considering the law with regard to claim construction, it is seen
that the suit patent is a single patent being IN175971 for a „Digital
Transmission System‟ with specified frame-generation logic,
synchronization and formula-based packet structure. A bare perusal of the
suit patent demonstrates that the „Digital Transmission System‟ covered in
the suit patent contains 17 Claims, each of which are for a „Digital
Transmission System‟. Thus, what falls from perusal of Claim 1 is that the
suit patent has three components which are integral for the working of the
claimed invention, i.e., a transmitter, a receiver and a transmission medium,
that are indispensable for performing the claimed function. Further, the
modified transmitter-receiver arrangement/framework, as described in Claim
1 and constructed hereinabove, is essential for the working of the suit patent.
Claim 1 of the suit patent clearly describes that the first converter circuit
forms part of the transmitter and the second converter circuit forms part of
the receiver.
39. Since the suit patent is essentially a system patent, this raises the
question of what system claims are, and how infringement of these claims
can be determined. These aspects have been dealt hereinafter.
System Claims and Infringement Analysis:
40. As to what a system claim means, the book titled Words and Phrases8
,
defines the term as follows:

8
Permanent Edition, Volume 40F, Thomson Reuters - Page 476.
―xxx xxx xxx
SYSTEM CLAIM
N.D.I11. 2018. A ―machine claim‖ in a patent, often referred to
as an ―apparatus‖ or ―system claim,‖ covers a concrete thing,
consisting of parts, or of certain devices and combination of devices. 35
U.S.C.A. 101. –Lecat‘s Ventriloscope v. MT Tool and Manufacturing, 351
F.Supp.3d 1100. –Pat 447.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
41. The Manual of Patent Examining Procedure, issued by the United
States Patent and Trademark Office (“USPTO”), U.S. Department of
Commerce, Government of United States of America, with regard to claim
interpretation of a system, elucidates as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
2111.04 ―Adapted to,‖ ―Adapted for,‖ ―Wherein,‖ ―Whereby,‖ and
Contingent Clauses [R-10.2019]
xxx xxx xxx
II. CONTINGENT LIMITATIONS
xxx xxx xxx
The broadest reasonable interpretation of a system (or apparatus or
product) claim having structure that performs a function, which only
needs to occur if a condition precedent is met, requires structure for
performing the function should the condition occur. The system claim
interpretation differs from a method claim interpretation because the
claimed structure must be present in the system regardless of whether
the condition is met and the function is actually performed.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
42. In India, though the Patents Act does not per se define what a system
claim is, the recent Guidelines for Examination of Computer Related
Inventions (“CRIs”), 2025, published by the Office of the Controller
General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks, Department for Promotion of
Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
Government of India, elucidate on the concept of system claims, in the
following manner:
―xxx xxx xxx
4.4 Sufficiency of Disclosure:
xxx xxx xxx
Fully and particularly (What):
If the patent application relates to apparatus/system/device, i.e.,
hardware-based inventions, each and every feature of the invention
shall be described with suitable illustrative drawings. If the
invention relates to ―method‖, the necessary sequence of steps shall
clearly be described so as to distinguish the invention from the prior
art with the help of the flowcharts and other information required to
perform the invention together with their implementing mechanism.
The specification shall describe the working relationship of different
components together with connectivity. It shall also describe the
desired result/output or the outcome of the invention as envisaged
and any intermediate applicable components/steps.
xxx xxx xxx
4.5 Determination of excluded subject matter relating to CRIs:
xxx xxx xxx
4.5.1 ―Mathematical Method‖:
Mathematical methods are a particular example of the principle that
purely abstract or intellectual methods are not patentable.
Mathematical methods like method of calculation, formulation of
equations, finding square roots, cube roots and all other similar acts
of mental skill are therefore, not patentable. Similarly mere
manipulations of abstract idea or solving purely mathematical
problem/equations without specifying a practical application also
attract the exclusion under this category. However, mere presence of
a mathematical formula in a claim, to clearly specify the scope of
protection being sought in an invention, may not necessarily render
it to be a ―mathematical method‖ claim. Also, such exclusions may
not apply to inventions that include mathematical formulae and
resulting in systems for encoding, reducing noise in
communications/ electrical/electronic systems or encrypting/
decrypting electronic communications.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
43. Therefore, it is clear that the suit patent claims/covers a product in the
form of a system, i.e., a system for digital transmission.
44. In order to prove infringement of the said product/system, the plaintiff
is required to map the claims in the suit patent with the product of the
defendants. In this regard, a reference may be made to a recent judgment of
the Division Bench of this Court in Mold Tek Packaging Limited Versus
Pronton Plast Pack Pvt. Ltd.9
, wherein, the Division Bench has observed as
follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
39. Whether infringement has, or has not, taken place in a
particular instance, has to be decided on the basis of a mapping
between the product of the defendant and the complete
specifications of the suit patent. Mr. Mehta is correct in his
submission that the comparison has to be product to patent and not
product to product. What is prohibited, by Section 48, is the making,
using, offering for sale, selling or importing of the product which
forms ―subject matter of‖ the patents held by another. In order to
ascertain whether this right has been breached, therefore, the Court
has to first ascertain the subject matter of the suit patent. This subject
matter is to be found in the complete specifications of the suit patent.
In other words, the Court as to compare the goods of the defendant
with the subject matter of the suit patent, as is contained in the
complete specifications of the suit patent, in order to ascertain
whether infringement has taken place. The comparison has,
therefore, to be product-to-patent, and not product-to- product.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
45. However, the plaintiff has failed to construct the suit patent and has
not done a „Claim Versus Product‟ comparison/mapping, in the manner as
required. Though, an attempt has been made by the plaintiff to map the
product of the defendants with the Claims of the suit patent in the technical
report by the technical expert of the plaintiff, PW3, however, in the same, the

9
2025 SCC OnLine Del 4883.
plaintiff has failed to identify the characterised features of the independent
Claim 1 of the suit patent, as has been discussed by this Court in the
preceding paragraphs. The relevant extract from the technical report
analysing the suit patent, as done by the technical expert of the plaintiff,
PW3, Professor K.R. Ramakrishnan, Department of Electrical Engineering,
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, attached with the Evidence Affidavit
of the aforesaid technical expert, is reproduced as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
xxx xxx xxx‖
46. The plaintiff has failed to show that each aspect of the defendants‟
product is covered by the features of the Claim of suit patent. Rather, the
plaintiff has straightaway compared the product of the defendants, i.e., the
VCD with the end result which is achieved in the suit patent, i.e., the frame
length of the audio frame of the VCD of the defendants, which as per the
plaintiff, matches with the audio frame length achieved through the system
described in the suit patent. The Evidence Affidavit of Professor K.R.
Ramakrishnan, PW3, the technical witness of the plaintiff, with regard to the
analysis of the VCD of the defendants, is reproduced as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
xxx xxx xxx‖
47. From a bare perusal of the Claims, it is clear that the suit patent
covers a product or a system having particular components, and it is not a
patent over a method/process or a technique. System claims are product
claims, and there is no dispute on this position of law. However, neither in
the Evidence Affidavit of the technical expert, nor in his technical report, the
essential features of the suit patent are disclosed or analysed in order to map
them with the system used by the defendants. The claim mapping, as done by
the plaintiff, is faulty, and does not establish that the suit patent covers the
defendants‟ product, or that the product of the defendants infringes the
system patent of the plaintiff.
48. Thus, it is to be noted that the system claims are product claims which
encompass the machine that is used to work and implement a technology.
Accordingly, system claims are distinct and separate from a method claim,
which are essentially process claims. However, as noted above, system
claims are not process claims, but rather product claims.
49. On the aspect that system claims are product claims, as in the present
case, reference may be made to the judgment of the United States Court of
Appeals, Federal Circuit in the case of Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Versus
Avadel CNS Pharmaceuticals LLC10
, wherein, it has been held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
Claim construction is a question of law that we review de novo. Cybor
Corp. v. FAS Techs., Inc., 138 F.3d 1448, 1454 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (en
banc). ―It is a ‗bedrock principle‘ of patent law that ‗the claims of a
patent define the invention[,] which the patentee is entitled . . . to
exclude.‘‖ Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1312 (Fed. Cir.
2005) (en banc) (quoting Innova/Pure Water, Inc. v. Safari Water
Filtration Sys., Inc., 381 F.3d 1111, 1115 (Fed. Cir. 2004)); see also
Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic, Inc., 90 F.3d 1576, 1582 (Fed. Cir.

10 60 F.4th 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2023) – Decision dated 24th February, 2023.
1996) (―[W]e look to the words of the claims themselves . . . to define
the scope of the patented invention.‖).
The district court determined that the ‘963 patent claims recite
systems, not methods. Decision at-,2022 WL 17084371, at *2−3. Jazz
contends that the word ―system‖ as it appears in the ‘963 patent
claims is, essentially, a synonym for ―method.‖ Appellant‘s Br. at
56−58. But method claims require the performance of steps; claims
that describe physical components of a whole are system, or
apparatus, claims. See Finjan, Inc. v. Secure Computing Corp., 626
F.3d 1197, 1204 (Fed. Cir. [*1380] 2010); In re Kollar, 286 F.3d
1326, 1332 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (noting the ―distinction between a claim
to a product, device, or apparatus, all of which are tangible items,
and a claim to a process, which consists of a series of acts or steps‖).
Each of the ‘963 patent‘s three independent claims describe a
―computer-implemented system‖ that comprises ―one or more
computer memories‖ and a ―data processor.‖ ‘963 patent at col. 8 1.
39−col. 9 at 1. 13 (independent claim 1); id. col. 10 1. 27−col. 11. 1.
6 (independent claim 23); id. col. 11 1. 7−col. 12 1. 10 (independent
claim 24). As the district court correctly analyzed in its Markman
Order, these claims recite ―an assemblage of components,‖ defining
a system. J.A. 5723. Jazz has not identified any description in the
patent specification or prosecution history to alter that conclusion.
The claims to a system comprising computer memories and a data
processor are not claims to a method.
xxx xxx xxx
…… See MasterMine Software, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 874 F.3d
1307, 1315−16 (Fed. Cir. 2017) (finding that the inclusion of active
verbs and other functional language describing the capabilities of a
claimed system does not transform a system claim into a method
claim); see also HTC Corp. v. IPCom GmbH & Co., 667 F.3d 1270,
1277 (Fed. Cir. 2012). We therefore find that the claims of the ‘963
patent were properly construed by the district court as system claims,
not method claims.
xxx xxx xxx
CONCLUSION
We have considered Jazz‘s remaining arguments and find them
unpersuasive. For the foregoing reasons, we affirm and lift our stay
of the injunction requiring Jazz to ask the FDA to delist the ‘963
patent…..‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
50. In order to prove infringement of the suit patent, the plaintiff would
have to establish the presence of each of the components of the system
described in Claim 1 of the suit patent, in the product of the defendants. In
this regard, reference may also be made to the “High Court of Delhi Rules
Governing Patent Suits, 2022”, wherein, under the “Infringement brief”, it
has been stated as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
2. Definitions
xxx xxx xxx
e. ‗Infringement brief‘
Brief to be filed by the Plaintiff, along with the claim construction
brief, that compares the elements of each of the claims, and the
manner in which the Defendant‘s product/process infringes the
claims relied upon. In the case of Standard Essential Patents
(SEPs), the infringement brief shall contain claim charts, mapping
the patent claims to the standards, and the manner in which the
Defendant infringes the same.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
51. Additionally, the aforesaid “High Court of Delhi Rules Governing
Patent Suits, 2022” also enumerate the content of pleadings, which, in case
of a “Plaint”, also include the following:
―xxx xxx xxx
3. Content of Pleadings
A. Plaint
The Plaint in an infringement action shall, to the extent possible,
include the following aspects:
xxx xxx xxx
(ix) Precise claims versus product (or process) chart mapping or
in the case of SEPs, claim chart mapping through standards;
(x) Infringement analysis explained with reference to the
granted claims in the specification. Details of the allegedly
infringing product or process, the manner in which
infringement is being alleged including, if available, a
description of the defendant‘s process;
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
52. Considering the aforesaid discussion, it is apparent that the plaintiff
has been unable to precisely map its Claims to the product of the defendants,
as mandated by the “High Court of Delhi Rules Governing Patent Suits,
2022”.
53. Accordingly, since the transmitter-receiver arrangement/framework, as
claimed in Claim 1 of the suit patent, is essential and integral to the working
of the invention claimed, the plaintiff was required to show that the system
used by the defendants, with a transmitter-receiver arrangement/framework,
physically performs the claimed functions, and not merely that its end
product, i.e., VCD contains compliant frames. The plaintiff was aware that
the defendants were using a machine by the name of Singulus, and the Local
Commissioners, appointed by this Court, had specifically identified the
model of the machine used by the defendants. Despite this, the plaintiff has
not analyzed the identified machines.
54. Plaintiff has categorically admitted that the machine used by the
defendants, as identified by the Local Commissioners, has not been
examined. Hence, the plaintiff has failed to establish, in any manner, the
nature of the machine used by the defendants to replicate the VCDs, in order
to establish that the same infringed upon the suit patent. In this regard, the
cross-examination of PW3, Professor K.R. Ramakrishnan, the technical
expert witness of the plaintiff, may be referred to. The relevant portions of
the cross-examination of PW3, are reproduced as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
Q.50 Is it correct that for the purposes of your report, you examined only
Annexure C of your affidavit?
A. Yes.
Q.51 Did you examine the machine, which is used for the manufacture of
VCDs, filed as Annexure C to your report?
A. No.
Q.52 Do you know of any machine, which is used for the purposes of
manufacture of VCDs, filed as Annexure C?
A. I know that the machines exist, but I don't know the brands of the
machines.
xxx xxx xxx
Q.54 Have you ever heard of the machines, as are used for the
manufacture of VCDs and their technology?
A. I am not knowledgeable about what goes on in the manufacturing of
the VCDs, as I am not a device technologist.
xxx xxx xxx
Q.66 Did you examine the nature of the machine, used by the defendants
for the transmission of digital signals on CD?
A. I have never seen the machine for duplicating CD or manufacturing
VCD.
I cannot say as to which machine, the defendants are using for the
manufacture of CDs or VCDs. As I understand they manufacture only
VCDs and not CDs.
xxx xxx xxx‖
55. Furthermore, there is not a single question or a suggestion given to the
defendants‟ witness DW1, that the defendants used a „transmitter‟ or a
„receiver‟. The technical expert witness of the plaintiff, i.e., PW3, has
conducted his infringement analysis based on the data that has been
―grabbed from the disc of the defendants‖ and his conclusions are in relation
to ―compression and packing of audio stream of the defendants‘ VCDs‖. In
other words, the infringement analysis done by the plaintiff‟s expert witness
is only with respect to the audio already packed on the defendants‟ VCD.
Thus, the plaintiff‟s entire case on infringement of the patent has proceeded
de hors the granted Claims, i.e., without mapping of all the elements of its
Claims onto defendants‟ product.
56. The plaintiff has failed to construct the suit patent and has not done a
‗Claim Versus Product‘ comparison, in the manner as was required, as per
the detailed discussion hereinabove. As aforesaid, from a bare perusal of the
Claims, it is clear that the suit patent covers a product or a system having
particular components. Systems claims are product claims. Thus, the onus of
proof vested squarely on the plaintiff to construct the Claims of the suit
patent and thereby, to prove the infringement of the constructed claims.
57. Rather, the plaintiff has compared the product of the defendants with
selected portions/elements of its Claims pertaining to only the end result, i.e.,
compressed data, in order to submit that the VCDs being manufactured and
sold by the defendants use the compression technique disclosed in the said
patent. This approach is totally fallacious. In this regard, reference may be
made to the judgment in the case of F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. & Anr.
Versus Cipla Ltd.11
, wherein, it has been held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
76. It is an incorrect analysis of product patent infringement in a case
like the present, to use methodologies like X-Ray diffraction to
ascertain whether the competing products are identical in nature. The
correct test of infringement in this case is to map Cipla product against
the Roche's patent claims, which we find has not been done by the
learned Single Judge, and this is the third infirmity on this aspect of
the dispute.
xxx xxx xxx
78. Thus the question at hand is really whether Cipla's Polymorph B
(Erlocip) was subsumed in the claims of IN ‗774. We find the answer in

11 2015 SCC OnLine Del 14738.
the decision reported as [2008] EWHC Civ 445 Servier v. Apotex.
Servier's attempt to secure a patent for the α-form of the t-butylamine salt
of perindopril failed both before the Patents Court and the Court of
Appeals which observed that the crystal form could easily be obtained by
carrying out the process disclosed in the basic patent. In refusing to
‗evergreen‘ the basic patent it was clear that the Court of Appeals was
not denying Servier the right to enforce the basic patent against a third
party attempting to manufacture the α-form crystals. In the present case
too, the correct analysis that the Learned Single Judge ought to have
employed was a construction of the IN ‗774 claim to understand
whether it encompassed the manufacture of Polymorph B of Erlotinib
Hydrochloride. By focusing on evidence involving the analysis of XRay diffraction data, the Learned Single Judge has erroneously
compared the products of Roche and Cipla when he ought to have
mapped the claims of the suit patent against Cipla's product. Counsels
for both the Appellant and the Respondent have not been able to assist
the court with authorities to support their stand on the test of
infringement required to be employed and much of the arguments have
been on first principles.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
58. The Courts have consistently ruled that for a patent infringement claim
to succeed, the defendant‟s product must meet all the conditions of the
plaintiff‟s patent claims. Infringement is only established when the
defendant‟s product falls within the scope of the plaintiff‟s patent claims. A
patent infringement is not established unless there is a direct overlap in the
claimed features of the patent and the defendant‟s product. (See: Arumugam
Rajendra Babu Versus Ashok Leyland Limited and Ors.12)
59. As noted above, the suit patent is a system/product patent. Hence, the
onus of proof was unambiguously on the plaintiff to demonstrate that the
system used by the defendants, maps to the system claim of the suit patent.
The onus of proof rested squarely on the plaintiff to construct the suit patent
and to prove the infringement of the suit patent. The failure of the plaintiff in

12 MANU/TN/6663/2024.
this regard is evident, as the plaintiff has failed to construct the suit patent as
per the Claims and has further, failed to show the overlap of the essential
features of its Claims on the defendants‟ product.
60. In this regard, this Court notes that the reliance of the plaintiff on
Section 104A of the Patents Act is misplaced, as the suit patent is not a
process patent. The plaintiff, to further its submissions on Section 104A of
the Patents Act, has relied upon the judgments in the cases of Natural
Remedies Pvt. Ltd. Versus Indian Herbs Research and Supply Co. Ltd. and
Others13 and Shogun Organics Ltd. Versus Gaur Hari Guchhait and
Others.
14 However, the aforesaid judgments do not come to the aid of the
plaintiff in any manner and submissions of the plaintiff in this regard cannot
be sustained, in view of the fact that the suit patent is a system/product
patent.
61. It is also to be noted that the defendants did not manufacture the
VCDs, but only replicated the same by use of the replication machinery
acquired from Singulus. As such, the process of replication does not involve
any transmission or compression mechanism. The Merriam-Webster
Dictionary defines replication as copy/reproduction or the action or process
of reproducing or duplicating. Even the Collins English Dictionary defines
replication, inter alia, as the act of repeating, duplicating, copying, and
reproducing.
62. This Court takes note of the submission of the defendants that in the
whole process of replication, defendants do not use any software or hardware
for digital transmission and compression of information. In this regard,

13 2011 SCC OnLine Kar 4561.
14 2019 SCC OnLine Del 9653.
reference may be made to submission of the defendants in their written
statement, as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
5. That the technique used by the Defendant for replication is
licensed from Singulus technologies AG, a Germany based
company. Defendants use their machine called ―Automatic CD
manufacturing system Skyline with one molding machine‖. The
Skyline is controlled through one Siemens PLC type S7 and one
software of Mithsubishi and interfaces with a Singulas proprietary
visualization package based on Microsoft Windows 2000 as man
machine interface. It is strongly submitted that Defendant do not use
the alleged infringed technique or any technique for compression.
6. The alleged infringed patent relates to a digital transmission
system comprising a transmitter and a receiver, for transmitting a
wideband digital signal. It is strongly submitted that technology used
by Defendant for replication of CD/VCD do not involve any such
mechanism. Following features characterize the Skyline II concept
used for Replication:
a) Injenction Moulding Machine equipped with special CD
molds that are specially designed for molding of CD‘s from
Polycarbonate of adequate quality.
b) Cooling Conveyor with 13 positions between each delivery
point from the take out robot of the molding machine to the
transfer position to the sputter module.
c) High Rate Sputter Station for Metallization of the information
side of the active disc.
d) Focus Splutter Cathode and Masking Units with one energy
saving high performance FOCUS Cathode achieving the
specified layer characteristics for the metalization of CD.
e) Bonding unit: the bonding unit consisting of a spin of bowl
and an I Bond system guaranteeing prevention of generation of
bubbles during the bonding process.
f) Spin off units to rotate the disc while dispensing the lacquer
or bonding resin.
g) UV curing station where the CD is exposed to the UV
radiation source for curing.
As can be seen from the above steps, the entire process does not
involve any transmitter or receiver of digital signals.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
63. At this stage, it would be useful to refer to the steps involved in the
process of replication. In general, the method of replication of a CD involves
transferring information from a disc, by use of a „glass master‟, to several
other discs. This „glass master method‟ first helps in creation of a „stamper‟
which is then put into an injection moulding machine whereon new CDs are
made by stamping molten polycarbonate.
64. More specifically, it is noted that the glass master or the „Master Disc‟
has to necessarily contain the information/data that is required to be copied
onto the other discs/VCDs. In order to feed the said information into the
Master Disc, the same is reacted with the digital audio file, also known as the
master audio file, which is in binary, i.e., made up of a series of 1s and 0s.
The pattern can be transferred onto the Master Disc, whenever there is a 1 in
the audio master. From the above Master Disc, a final product is made,
known as the stamper, which acts as a negative for the content that has to be
copied to the other discs. As noted above, the said stamper is put in the
mould cavity of the injection moulding machines. Using these machines, a
disc is made by injecting molten polycarbonate onto the stamper and the data
which is then produced on the created disc will be the complement of the
stamper and positive replica of the glass master.
65. Thus, it is evident that the process of replication of VCDs does not
involve transmission of digital signals. Whereas, the whole inventive concept
of suit patent is based upon putting the entire system to use and benefitting
from it. In this regard, reference may be made to the decision of United
States Court of Appeals, Federal Circuit, in the case of CloudofChange,
LLC Versus NCR Corporation15
, wherein, it has been held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
Because this case turns on the application of Centillion and principles
of vicarious liability, we begin by discussing our precedent and the
relevant legal framework.
This court first addressed the issue of infringement for ―use‖ of a
system claim that includes elements in the possession of more than
one actor in Centillion. We held that a party ―uses‖ a system for
purposes of infringement when it ―control[s] the system as a whole
and obtain[s] benefit from it.‖ Centillion, 631 F.3d at 1284. The
control contemplated is not direct or physical control over each
individual element of the system, but rather the ability to make the
system elements "work for their patented purpose" and thus use
―every element of the system by putting every element collectively
into service.‖ Id.
xxx xxx xxx
Specifically, the district court's analysis conflates use of a method
claim (which was at issue in Akamai) with use of a system claim
(which was at issue in Centillion). ―Under section 271(a), the concept
of ‗use‘ of a patented method or process is fundamentally different
from the use of a patented system or device.‖ NTP, Inc. v. Rsch. In
Motion, Ltd., 418 F.3d 1282, 1317 (Fed. Cir. 2005). ―[T]he use of a
process necessarily involves doing or performing [*1342] each of the
steps recited,‖ while the ―use of a system as a whole‖ involves
putting that entire system to use and benefitting from it. Id. at 1318.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
66. Another important fact to be noted here is that VCD replication is
done from the original Master Disc, which is neither produced nor
manufactured by the defendants. As per the defendants, the manufacture and
production of the original Master Disc, from which replication is carried out
by the defendants, is done at the end of the producers of movies/producers of
the VCDs. It is to be noted that the plaintiff has also admitted that replication

15 123 F.4th 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2024) – Decision dated 18th December, 2024.
as such did not involve compression of information. If that be the case, in
order to prove infringement, the plaintiff was required to prove and establish
that the original Master Discs, received from third parties, from which
replication was done by the defendants, used the patented technology of the
plaintiff. However, the plaintiff has not established that the original Master
Discs, as supplied by third parties to the defendants, employed the patent of
the plaintiff in order to produce such Masters. In absence thereof, it cannot
be stated that the replicated VCDs of the defendants infringed the patent of
the plaintiff in any manner. If the plaintiff had established that the original
Master Disc used by the defendants had been produced and manufactured by
using the patented system of the plaintiff, then such act of replication by the
defendants could have been said to infringe the plaintiff‟s patent.
67. On the aspect of infringement, the plaintiff in its plaint has submitted
as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
16. The Plaintiff submits that the application of audio content to any
VCD using the Patented process/system of the Plaintiff would
amount to an infringement of the Plaintiff's patent No. 175971.
Additionally, any person/entity indulging in the replication of VCDs
using the Patented process of the Plaintiff, or for that matter selling,
offering for sale or even stocking infringing VCDs would infringe
the exclusive rights of the Plaintiff and be liable accordingly……..
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
68. A reading of the aforesaid submissions, as made in the plaint by the
plaintiff, clearly shows that it is the plaintiff‟s own case that the application
of audio content to any VCD using the patented process/system of the
plaintiff would amount to infringement of the plaintiff‟s suit patent. Meaning
thereby, that the plaintiff has itself stated that the actual infringement of the
VCD takes place at the end of the manufacturer of the Masters, i.e.,
producers of the movies/third parties. Thus, in order to prove infringement
by the defendants, the plaintiff was required to show that the original Master
Discs, as provided to the defendants by the producers of the movies/other
third parties, were made using the machine or system as per the suit patent
and infringed the suit patent. In absence thereof, the replication of the VCDs
done by the defendants, cannot be said to be infringing the suit patent,
especially, when it has not been shown by the plaintiff that the technique of
replication used by the defendants, in any way, involves the mechanism
given in Claims of the suit patent.
69. When the transmission of information to the original VCD is not done
at the end of the defendants, the plaintiff was required to show that the
original Master Disc itself infringed the suit patent by using the system of
the suit patent. Therefore, in the absence of any evidence, it cannot be
presumed that any system, as defined in the suit patent, was being used in
producing the original VCD or while replicating the VCD by the defendants.
70. At this stage, it would be useful to refer to the written statement filed
by the defendants, wherein, it is categorically stated that the process of
replication does not require any transmission or compression mechanism. It
has further come to the fore that the defendants do not use any software or
hardware for digital transmission and compression of information. Relevant
portions of the written statement of the defendants in this regard, read as
under:
―xxx xxx xxx
3. It is a well-known fact that the process of Replicators does not
require any transmission or compression mechanism associated
as such, particularly with an old patent based on an invention of
the year 1990. Plaintiff is not entitled to charge any royalty for the
alleged infringed patent (which is very old and not in use) in the
suit. However, Plaintiff and its pool of companies often indulge in
malpractices to pressurize the manufacturers like Defendants to
pay hefty royalty fee irrespective of the fact whether they use their
techniques or not. The problem is so acute that a special worldwide
organization, "International Optical Disc Replicators Association"
(www.iodra.com) having its head quarter at Switzerland has been
formed. The aim of the said association is to protect replicators
from patently strong royalty seekers like Plaintiff and to ensure
level playing field for them. The said association has members from
various countries in Asia, Africa, Australia, Europe and North
America.
II. Defendant is using a unique technology independent of any
transmitter or receiver
4. That the present suit is not maintainable as the alleged patent is
obsolete and not in use any more. Worldwide a far superior
technology is used for the manufacture, transmitting and
compressing data. Further in the whole process of replication,
Defendants do not use any software or hardware for digital
transmission and compression of information.
xxx xxx xxx
12. ......... The Plaintiff alleges in paragraph 36 (on page 16 & 17
of the suit) that the actual infringement of the VCD takes place at
the end of the Manufacturer of the Masters (i.e. the producer of
the movie). The technique of replication (by the Defendant) in no
way involves the mechanism given in Claim I or Claim II of the
patent no. 175971. It is the producers of the movies (or the
manufacturers of the stampers) who are the necessary parties and
without whom the process of infrangibility of the patent no.
175971 cannot be ascertained.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
71. Additionally, the plaintiff itself in its replication to the written
statement, states as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
9. …… The Plaintiff herein emphasizes that the replication
technology as such has nothing to do with audio compression or
decompression but for the fact that replication of Video CDs
unavoidably results in discs, which comprise audio that has been
compressed according to the rules of the audio standard ISO/IEC
11172 -3. The Plaintiff states that it does not matter whether other
patents may cover far better technologies, the point that really counts
is that the Plaintiff registered Patent No. 175971 covers a part of the
ISO/IEC 11172-3, which is mandatory to be used when replicating
VCDs. Therefore the Plaintiff Patent No. 175971 is used. The
existence of other patents does not change these facts or alter the
liability of the defendant for infringing the Patent Rights of the
Plaintiff herein. ……
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
72. Thus, the plaintiff itself has recognized and admitted the fact that
replication technology has nothing to do with the audio compression or
decompression. This fact is reiterated by the plaintiff in para 14 of its
replication, in the following manner:
―xxx xxx xxx
14. …….The Plaintiff herein emphasizes that the replication
technology as such has nothing to do with audio compression or
decompression but for the fact that replication of Video CDs
unavoidably results in discs, which comprise audio that has been
compressed according to the rules of the audio standard ISO/IEC
11172 -3. The Plaintiff states that It does not matter whether other
patents may cover far better technologies, the point that really counts
is that the Plaintiff registered Patent No. 175971 covers a part of the
ISO/IEC 11172 - 3, which is mandatory to be used when replicating
VCDs. Therefore the Plaintiff Patent No. 175971 is used. The
existence of other patents does not change these facts or alter the
liability of the defendant for infringing the Patent Rights of the
Plaintiff herein. Additionally, it is pertinent to note that the Plaintiff's
Patent No.175971 has a validity of 20 years, as provided by the
Patents Act, 1970, and is thus valid till May 28, 2010. ……
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
73. In this regard, reference may also be made to the Evidence Affidavit of
PW1, wherein, admitting that replication technology has nothing to do with
the audio compression or decompression, the plaintiff has tried to justify its
averments by contending that the ISO/IEC 11172-3 is an international
standard, which would essentially be contained in a VCD which plays on a
VCD player. Thus, PW1 in his Evidence Affidavit, has stated as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
49. I state that the defendant is manufacturing / replicating Video
CDs, which are playable on any Video CD Player worldwide. I state
that the specifications for Video CD have been defined in the year
1992, vide Video CD Specification Version 1.0, and have been updated
in the year 1995 vide Video CD Specification Version 2.0. The Video
CD Specification Version 1.0 and Video CD Specification Version 2.0
are enclosed herewith and marked as Exhibit P-1/43 & Exhibit P1/44. I state I state that a Video CD contains a number of tracks, of
which track 2 and higher are MPEG Audio/Video Tracks. This is set
out at Chapter 11.2.4 titled MPEG Audio/Video Tracks. I say that
Chapter IV.1 titled General of the said standard specifies that the
Motion Pictures (as also Video) and their associated Audio are coded
according to the Video and Audio part of the MPEG standard ISO
11172. Chapter I.1 of the specification specifies ISO 11172 as:
Information Technology - Coding of moving pictures and associated
audio for digital media up to about 1,5 Mbit/s (which is the ―MPEG
standard‖). Ref. No. ISO DIS 1172:1992 (E). The ISO/IEC 11172-3:
1993 (E) is part 3 of the total ISO 11172 Standard and defines the
rules for compression and decompression of Audio. I state that the
Plaintiff has made contributions to the said standard, especially in
the area of Audio data compression and packaging. I state that
Philips applied for patents in many countries, including in India on
the basis of its contribution. I say that the rules for audio-data
compression and packaging as specified in the ISO standard have
not been changed since 1993. I say that it is thus clear that both the
Video CD Specifications Version 1.0 and 2.0 refer to the ISO IEC
11172 - 3. I also state that it has clearly been demonstrated at claim
chart for PHN 13241 IN i.e. the Plaintiff Registered Patent No.
175971, that the subject matter of the patent is identical of certain
parts of the ISO IEC 11172 -3. The ISO/IEC 11172-3:1993 (E) is
enclosed and may be marked as Exhibit P-1/45. I say that therefore
the patent is not obsolete and is still used by all Video CD disc
manufacturers. I state that the ISO/IEC Standard has not been
changed since its definition in 1992 and thus even if superior
technologies are available, those technologies are not used and
cannot be used in Video CD disc or in Video CD players. A Video CD
disc manufactured by using technologies for Audio compression,
which are outside the scope of ISO/IEC 11172 - 3, will not play on a
Video CD Player. The statements of Defendant, that the patent is
obsolete and that for Video CDs superior technologies for audio
compression or decompression are used, are thus false and
misleading. I assert and emphasize that the replication technology as
such has nothing to do with audio compression or decompression
but for the fact that replication of Video CDs unavoidably will use
master discs, father discs, mothers discs and moulds, which
comprise audio that has been compressed and packaged according
to the rules of the audio standard ISO/IEC 11172 -3. I say that it
does not matter whether other patents may cover far better
technologies, the point that really counts is that the Plaintiffs
registered Patent No. 175971 covers a part of the ISO/IEC 11172 -3,
which is mandatory to be used when replicating VCDs. I therefore
say that the Plaintiffs registered Patent No. 175971 is used. I say that
the existence of other patents does not change these facts or alter the
liability of the defendant for infringing the Patent Rights of the
Plaintiff herein. Additionally, I am advised to say that it is pertinent to
note that the Plaintiffs Patent No.175971 has a validity of 20 years, as
provided by the Patents Act, 1970 (as amended by the Patents
(Amendment) Act 2002), and is valid till May 28, 2010. The
Defendant's statement that the patent is 15 years old has no relevance
in the face of law and the statute of the land. I am advised to state that
in fact the fact that the Plaintiff‘s Patent No. 175971 is a tried and
tested patent by virtue of its use over the years and in such respect this
Hon'ble Court will be inclined to treat the defendants claims with
circumspection as the said claims are clearly wrong and erroneous.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
74. While on the one hand, the plaintiff has admitted that the VCD
replication technology has nothing to do with audio compression, on the
other hand, it has admitted that replication of VCDs would involve use of
Master Discs containing audio that has been compressed and packed
according to the rules of the audio standard ISO/IEC 11172-3. However, the
plaintiff has failed to establish that the Master Discs used by the defendants,
themselves, employed the compression technology of the system patent of
the plaintiff or the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard. In absence of any cogent
evidence led by the plaintiff to establish that the Master Discs used by the
defendants used the patented system of the plaintiff, there cannot be any
presumption in favour of the plaintiff that the Master Discs used by the
defendants infringed the suit patent and consequently, that the defendants‟
VCDs infringed the suit patent.
75. Furthermore, it is not the plaintiff‟s case that the defendants were
making the Master Discs. Besides, no evidence has been led to prove that the
Master Discs used by the defendants for replication, infringed the suit patent.
Relevant portions of the replication filed on behalf of the plaintiff in this
regard can be referred to, which read as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
15. The contents of paragraph 12 of the preliminary submissions of
the written statement are denied. The Plaintiff has already
demonstrated that the Defendants uses the said patent of the Plaintiff,
without due authorization and thus is liable for the said infringing
activity. The actions of the defendants are fundamental to the act of
infringement i.e. the acts pertaining to:
a. Sourcing / arranging for the Manufacture of infringing
‗stampers‘ being Discs from which at least 25,000 CD can be
manufactured. The said stampers are all encoded on the basis of
technology flowing from Patent No.175971. The stampers are
made from Discs colloquially referred to as 'Mothers' which are
in turn replicated from discs referred to as 'Fathers'. The discs
referred to as Fathers are manufactured from Glass Discs
known as 'Masters';
b. Manufacturing/Replicating VCD's based upon the said
stampers;
c. Offering for sale / selling the said VCD's to various
parties
The Defendants' use of Replication machinery in order to
manufacture infringing VCDs amounts to infringement of the rights
of the Plaintiff in the Patent No.175971.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
76. As noted above, the plaintiff has not been able to establish in any
manner, in the absence of any evidence in that regard, that the Master Discs
used by the defendants for replication, infringed the suit patent. Besides, as
per plaintiff‟s own admission, the Master Discs were not being manufactured
by the defendants.
77. Moreover, the entire suit of the plaintiff is based on results derived
from copied data from VCD to a hard disc. Claim 1 of the suit patent is about
the system having a specific arrangement/framework of receiver and
transmitter. However, no such infringing system has been identified in the
technical report of PW3, the technical expert of the plaintiff. As regards the
technology used by the defendants for replication, in their written statement,
defendants have stated as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
13. The contents of paragraph no. 13 are denied for want of
knowledge and Plaintiff should be put to strict proof of the same. It is
further submitted that the technology used by the Defendant for
replication is licensed from Singulus technologies AG, a Germany
based company. Defendants use their machine called "Automatic
CD manufacturing system Skyline with one molding machine". The
Skyline is controlled through one Siemens PLC type S7 and one
software of Mithsubishi and interfaces with a Singulas proprietary
visualization package based on Microsoft Windows 2000 as man
machine interface. It is strongly submitted that Defendant's do not
use any of the patented products of the Plaintiff.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
78. The plaintiff has only relied upon the technical affidavit of its witness,
who has based his analysis on the basis of data copied from VCD to a hard
disc. The technical expert of the plaintiff has not been able to establish that
the defendants used the digital transmission system of the plaintiff, which is
the suit patent. As noted above, as per Claim 1 of the suit patent, there exists
a transmission system, comprising of a transmitter and a receiver for
transmitting a wide-band digital signal of a specific sample frequency (F).
The transmitter should have an input terminal for receiving the wide-band
digital signal, which input terminal is coupled to an input of „a first converter
circuit‟, which forms part of the transmitter and which is for generating a
second digital signal and supply said signal to an output. Accordingly, the
suit patent is a system claim where the essential features are the existence of
a transmitter and receiver, as characterised in Claim 1. Whereas, the VCD
used for arriving at the conclusion pertaining to infringement, is the storage
medium, on which the compressed signals can be stored. Thus, the plaintiff
has not established, in any manner, that the VCD containing the compressed
signals, has used the system patent of the plaintiff for compressing such
information in the VCD. Therefore, even if the scheme of packing data is the
same in VCDs, it does not mean that any system/apparatus exists with the
defendants, which infringes Claim 1 and Claim 2 of the suit patent, as
alleged by the plaintiff.
79. On the aspect of „use‟ by the defendants of the suit patent, the plaintiff
seeks to rely upon the judgment in the case of Monsanto Technology LLC
and Ors. Versus Nuziveedu Seeds Limited & Ors.16 to submit that the
defendants‟ use of the replication machinery, in order to manufacture
infringing VCDs, amounts to infringement of the suit patent under Section
48 of the Patents Act. However, it is pertinent to note that the aspect of „use‟
of the system claimed by the suit patent, in the replication process
undertaken by the defendants, has not been established by the plaintiff, and
therefore, the aforesaid judgment does not aid the case of the plaintiff.

16 2017 SCC OnLine Del 7652.
80. It is also to be noted that the format of data, as per Claim 1 and Claim
2, is such that the second digital signal (output) is substantially equal to Fs
/ns
and where the value of P equals P = BR X ns
/Nx Fs
.
81. It is pertinent to note that the subject matter of the suit patent is a
„system‟ of transmission and not the format of transmitted data, as available
on a VCD. Merely because the format of packed data is similar in the VCD,
it cannot be concluded that the system that has embedded that data is the one
described in Claims 1 and 2 of the suit patent. This Court concurs with the
analogy put forth by the defendants that ―the plaintiff has stated that because
defendants‘ ice cream has the same taste/ingredients as that mentioned in the
suit patent; and therefore, it must have been manufactured by the same
system/machine as is claimed in the suit patent‖.
82. The reliance by the plaintiff on the affidavit of its technical expert and
the results therein is flawed, as the same is based on results derived from
copied data from VCD to a hard disc. Evidently, the results are based from
the data captured on a VCD. However, no infringing system has been
identified in the technical report. Further, the results only mention that the
data compressed in the VCD is as per the format given in the suit patent,
which fact, as such by itself, does not establish infringement, in view of the
detailed discussions hereinabove.
83. As noted above, the process of replication does not involve any
process of compression of information, or data. Thus, merely because the
format of the data analyzed in the VCD is as per the suit patent, there is no
evidence on record that the defendants used the compression
system/technique disclosed in the said patent.
84. It is pertinent to note that the plaintiff acknowledges that there is no
single patent governing the storage of information on transmission media. In
this regard, reference may be made to the stance of the plaintiff, as contained
in the plaint as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
8. One such achievement of their R&D efforts has been a Video
Compact Disc (VCD) using MPEG coding with better audio
compression technique. Being a part of this patent pool, the Plaintiff
has the right to license and sub-license the patents in the pool to the
manufacturers of such systems and media.
xxx xxx xxx‖
85. Likewise, PW1 in para 9 of his Evidence Affidavit, deposes as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
9. I say that one such achievement of their R&D efforts has been a
Video Compact Disc (VCD) using the worldwide standard i.e. the
MPEG coding with better audio compression technique. Being a part
of the VCD patent pool, the Plaintiff has the right to license and sublicense the patents in the pool to the manufacturers of such systems
and media.
xxx xxx xxx‖
86. Admitting that the audio compression/decompression technique is
subject matter of a larger patent pool in para 3 of his Evidence Affidavit,
PW2 has deposed as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
3. I say that the Plaintiff Company is a world leader in optical disc
technology. I am advised that the Plaintiff has substantially
contributed in perfecting an audio compression/decompression
technique, which forms part of a worldwide standard i.e. the MPEG
Audio coding/decoding technique and which is applied in Video
Compact Discs and Video Compact Disc Players. This technique is
subject to a larger Patent pool and is protected under Patent Laws in
India and in many other countries. Thus the Plaintiff Company thus
retains the right to license and sub-license the patents in the pool to
the manufacturers of such Video Compact Discs and Video Compact
Disc Players.
xxx xxx xxx‖
87. The plaintiff has not been able to establish that the Master Discs used
by the defendants use the system covered in the suit patent for compression
of audio signal. This becomes all the more material since the plaintiff has
admitted that replication does not, in any manner, pertain to the compression
of information. Thus, when it is the clear case of the defendants that they had
used the technology employed by the Singulus machine for replication, and
in the light of the admission of the plaintiff that replication, as such, does not
use the process of compression, the plaintiff has failed to establish any
infringement on the part of the defendants, when it is not even established
that the Master Discs, from which the defendants replicated VCDs, infringed
the independent and broadest Claim 1 of the suit patent, in any manner.
88. It is settled law that if infringement of the independent claim is not
proved, then the infringement qua the dependant claims of the suit patent
cannot be established. In other words, infringement of dependant Claim 2, as
alleged by the plaintiff, cannot be said to be established unless it is shown by
the plaintiff that the defendants‟ product/system was covered by the
independent Claim of the suit patent, i.e., Claim 1. Reference in this regard
may be made to the judgment of the United States Court of Claims in
Teledyne McCormick Selph Versus United States17, wherein, it has been
observed as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
The patent in suit issued with 10 claims and Plaintiff charges
Defendant with infringing all 10 claims. Moreover, claim 1, which
follows, is the only independent Claim:
xxx xxx xxx
It, of course, has long been established that a dependent claim, such
as claims 2-10 of the Allen patent, cannot be infringed unless the

17 558 F.2d 1000, 214 Ct.Cl. 672 (Fed. Cl. 1977) – Decision dated 08th July, 1977.
accused device is also covered by the independent Claim, claim 1.
Dresser Industries, Inc. v. United States, 432 F.2d 787, 193 Ct.Cl.
140, 167 USPQ 473 (1970). Since, as will be shown hereinbelow, the
evidence of record conclusively establishes that the acts of
Defendant do not infringe claim 1 of the patent in suit, no purpose is
served by considering or reproducing dependent claims 2 through
10.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis supplied)
Plaintiff‘s Claim of Suit Patent being an SEP
89. This brings us to the issue of SEP, as raised by the plaintiff to claim
that ISO/IEC 11172-3, which defines the rules for compression and
decompression of audio, is the standard upon which the suit patent is based.
It is pertinent to note that no issue has been framed regarding the suit patent
being an SEP. Nevertheless, this Court is considering the said issue on
account of the vehement submissions of the plaintiff in that regard.
90. At this stage, it would be relevant to allude to the concept of SEPs.
Elucidating upon the concept of „Standard‟ and „Essentiality‟ in respect of
SEPs, Pratibha M. Singh on Patents Law18
, has stated as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
WHAT ARE STANDARDS?
16-002 Standards are parameters/features which are fixed with respect
to a type of product. All products adhering to a standard have
uniformity in basic functions, consistency in performance, possess
minimum technical features, provide compatibility, and are
interoperable. Products which adhere to standards also have lower
manufacturing costs as uniformity also increases the consumer base for
such products. Even the costs for consumers to switch from one product
to the other is easier, with standards. Standards are of two kinds, namely
mandatory standards (also known as normative standards) and optional
standards.‖
e of two kinds, namely mandatory standards (also known as normative
standards) and optional standards.‖

18 First Edition (2024), Volume 1, Thomas Reuters, Legal.
xxx xxx xxx
WHAT IS A ―STANDARD ESSENTIAL PATENT‖?
16-014 Developers of technologies are not very many in number. They
undertake continuous research in their respective fields and usually
own a portfolio of patents which read on the standards. In order to
understand how to determine if an SEP is in fact part of the
standard and essential to such standard, the process of fixing of
standards needs to be understood. The SSOs seek presentations from
various technology owners as to what are the features that ought to
be included in the standard. Once a particular feature is identified,
various owners make their respective presentations on how the
feature should be incorporated into the standard. The manner in
which such features get incorporated into the standard which are
then implemented into the product is the process of standardisation.
When two or more owners have made their respective presentations
and the technology of one of the owners is accepted as part of a
mandatory standard, the said company‘s role is acknowledged by the
SSO in the development of the standard in a general manner. The
patent specification relating to the said feature can then be mapped
onto the standard to argue that the said feature complies with the
standard and hence the patent relating to the feature is an SEP.
HOW TO DETERMINE ESSENTIALITY AND INFRINGEMENT?
xxx xxx xxx
• Is testing required to establish Essentiality? – No testing would be
required to establish the essential nature of a patent because, the
process of standardisation is quite well-accepted globally. There are
many experts including persons from techno-legal background, who
are able to map the contents of a specification to a standard and
after taking the additional factors set out above into consideration,
are capable of giving an opinion as to the essential nature of a patent.
Moreover, whenever the technology of a particular owner is accepted
to be part of a standard, the SSO‘s or other peer reviewed material
which would be contemporaneously available would in most cases,
acknowledge the contribution of the owner. The relevant trade and
industry would, due to the widely accepted role of the owner of the
technology, be fully aware of the contribution to the standard. Thus,
though several implementers tend to question the standard and
essential nature of the patent, such a challenge is usually, to support
the non-payment of royalty or to seek reduction in payment of royalty.
Though testing would not be required, the SSOs documentation at
the time of preparation of the standard, the contemporaneous
technical publications, the technical reports acknowledging the
owner‘s contribution, recognition given to the owner for the said
contribution, along with mapping of the claims would clearly
establish a patent is in fact a Standard Essential Patent. The
strongest corroborative evidence of the standard and essential nature
of the technology owned by the entity would be the large-scale
licensing arrangements which the owner would have entered into
with various implementers for the said technology.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
91. Likewise, the World Intellectual Property Organisation (“WIPO”)
website19 defines SEP as:
―xxx xxx xxx
A standard essential patent (SEP) is a patent that protects an
invention essential to the implementation of a particular technology
standard. These standards are critical for ensuring safety,
interoperability and compatibility of different products and services
made available by various companies.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
The website further clarifies:
―xxx xxx xxx
Standards and SEPs
Technology standards can be complex. Often, there are numerous
SEPs that correspond to a particular standard. Some products may
rely only on parts of a standard to carry out a certain function, and
some others may implement multiple standards at once. This is
particularly the case in the field of information and communication
technologies (ICT), where there is a greater need for interoperability.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
92. Furthermore, while discussing the concept of SEP, Terrell on the Law
of Patents20
, has stated as follows:

19 Official website of WIPO - https://www.wipo.int/en/web/patents/topics/sep.
20 Nineteenth Edition (2020), Thomson Reuters.
―xxx xxx xxx
18-07
xxx xxx xxx
The key word in para.4.1 is ―essential‖. This is defined in para.15(6)
of the IPR policy as:
―‗ESSENTIAL‘ as applied to IPR means that it is not possible on
technical (but not commercial) grounds, taking into account normal
technical practice and the state of the art generally available at the
time of standardization, to make, sell, lease, otherwise dispose of,
repair, use or operate EQUIPMENT or METHODS which comply
with a STANDARD without infringing that IPR. For the avoidance
of doubt in exceptional cases where a STANDARD can only be
implemented by technical solutions, all of which are infringements
of IPRs, all such IPRs shall be considered ESSENTIAL.‖
Thus a patent is ―essential‖ to a standard if it is not possible on
technical grounds to comply with the standard without infringing
the patent. This is considered further below.
xxx xxx xxx
5.WHAT DOES ESSENTIAL MEAN?
18-40 The concept of essentiality is an important one in the context of
FRAND because it is the fact that a patent is essential in the first
place which gives rise to the need to prevent a patent holder holding
to ransom undertakings wishing to make, sell and use equipment in
accordance with that standard. The definition of the term ESSENTIAL
in the currently applicable ETSI IPR Policy (para.15(6)) is set out
above. In summary the definition means that a patent is essential to
a standard if it is not possible on technical grounds to comply with
the standard without infringing the patent. This simple definition is
adequate in many circumstances but not all. Although this discussion
will focus on the ETSI definition, the issues are likely to be inherent in
any attempt to define what a patent essential to a standard is.
xxx xxx xxx
18-45 As stated above, the simple definition of essential (not
possible to comply with the standard without infringement) is often
adequate for all purposes but the scope of the concept of essentiality
is not limited to that simple definition. Many standards contain
optional features. A patent may relate to that option. From a standard
setting point of view, the SSO will want any patents on optional
features to be subject to FRAND licences. However, by definition it
will be possible to comply with the standard without implementing
such options and so, by definition, a patent covering that option
cannot be one which has to be infringed in order to comply with the
standard. It is submitted that the better view is that a patent which
covers an option expressly provided for in a standard is to be
regarded as a standard essential patent. The fact it is essential to an
optional feature may well affect what a FRAND royalty rate would be
for that patent (and other terms) but that is different question from
whether it is subject to a FRAND obligation.
xxx xxx xxx
18-47 The current ETSI definition seeks to address a problem related
to options in the last sentence of para.15(6) which starts with the
words ―for the avoidance of doubt‖ and ―in exceptional cases‘‘. This
sentence provides that ―where a STANDARD can only be
implemented by technical solutions, all of which are infringements
of IPRs, all such IPRs shall be considered ESSENTIAL.‖……..
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
93. Further on the concept of SEP, reference may also be made to the
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (“ETSI”), which is a
French association formed in 1988 and recognised as the SSO in the
European Union telecommunications sector. The ETSI IPR Policy is a
contractual document, governed by French law, which speaks of patents that
are inevitably infringed by the sale, lease, use, operation, etc., of components
complying with a standard as “Essential IPR”. The relevant Article of the
ETSI IPR Policy, for the understanding of the issue at hand, is reproduced as
under:
―15. Definitions
xxx xxx xxx
6. ―ESSENTIAL‖ as applied to IPR means that it is not possible
on technical (but not commercial) grounds, taking into account
normal technical practice and the state of the art generally
available at the time of standardization, to make, sell, lease,
otherwise dispose of, repair, use or operate EQUIPMENT or
METHODS which comply with a STANDARD without
infringing that IPR. For the avoidance of doubt in exceptional
cases where a STANDARD can only be implemented by
technical solutions, all of which are infringements of IPRs, all
such IPRs shall be considered ESSENTIAL.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
94. The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Intex Technologies
(India) Ltd. Versus Telefonaktiebolaget L.M. Ericsson (Publ)21
, has defined
SEP and laid down tests for infringement in an SEP matter. Thus, it has held
as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
60. Keeping in view the aforesaid as well as the fact that TRAI has
directed telecommunication companies to comply with ETSI
standards, this Court is of the view that the term ‗Essential‘ in the
facts of the present case means that a patent is essential to a
standard i.e. it is not possible on technical grounds to comply with
the standard without infringing the patent. This Court is of the
opinion that this simple definition is adequate in many
circumstances like the present one but not all. Consequently,
a Standard Essential Patent is ―a patent claiming technology that
is essential to an industry standard‘s use‖.
61. Standard Essential Patents are treated differently from nonStandard Essential Patents-in at least in one respect i.e., the rights of
a patentee in case of a Standard Essential Patents are circumscribed
by its contractual commitment made to a SSO/SDO to make the
patent available to all those who are willing licensees while the term
of the patent is subsisting. Consequently, Intellectual Property Rights
Policies of SDOs usually impose at least the following obligations on
Standard Essential Patent holders:
(i) The duty to disclose relevant patents as being Standard
Essential Patents.
(ii) The duty to make available the Standard Essential Patents to
all those who are willing to use it, and not to withhold access.
(iii) The duty to offer licences to all willing licensees on FRAND
terms.
xxx xxx xxx

21
 2023 SCC OnLine Del 1845.
75. The Delhi High Court's Rules Governing Patent Suits 2022 have
formally recognized Standard Essential Patents and the different
legal tests that are involved in their adjudication. Some of the Rules
specific to Standard Essential Patents are reproduced
hereinbelow:—
―2. Definitions…
(e) ‗Infringement brief - ‗…. In the case of Standard Essential
Patents (SEPs), the infringement brief shall contain claim
charts, mapping the patent claims to the standards, and the
manner in which the Defendant infringes the same‘
(f) ‗non-infringement brief ‗…as also in the case of SEPs, the
Defendant shall disclose whether its products comply with the
standard or the alternate technology/patent being implemented
by it. The said party is also free to furnish its own Claim
construction brief or claim mapping, if it so chooses, to support
the plea of non-infringement‘
3. Contents of pleadings
A. Plaint - The plaint in an infringement action shall, to the
extent possible, include the following aspects:
(ix) ―Precise claims v. product (or process) chart mapping, or
in the case of SEPs, claim chart mapping through standards‖
B. Written Statement- The Written Statement in an
infringement action shall, to the extent possible, include the
following aspects:…..
(vi) If the Defendant raises a case of non-infringement, the
products/process/technology being used by the Defendant would
also be specified. Onus of proving infringement would, however,
be in terms of Section 104A of the Act;
4. Documents to be filed by either party…
C Any other documents to be filed by either party…
(ii) Details of licensees, royalty, FRAND pricing (under
sealed cover) may be filed.
5. First hearing of the suit……
(v) Upon infringement being prima facie established, the court
may pass directions for monetary payments instead of an
injunction, in exceptional situations, and on such terms and
conditions as the Court may deem fit‖
xxx xxx xxx
WHAT IS THE TEST OF INFRINGEMENT IN A STANDARD
ESSENTIAL PATENT MATTER?
92. Since the SSOs do not check which patents are actually essential
and the declarants do not provide any proof of essentiality, there is a
possibility of a lot of blanket declarations being made which can be
misleading. Consequently, the test for infringement in the case of an
unwilling licensee of a Standard Essential Patent would have to be
satisfied at the prima facie stage.
93. There is the direct test of infringement which is applied in all
standard patent cases. The other is the indirect method which
involves proving the following steps:
(i) Mapping patentee's patent to the standard to show that the
patent is a Standard Essential Patent.
(ii) Showing that the implementer's device also maps to the standard.
94. This is akin to the Law of Transitivity, i.e., if A=B and B=C, then
A=C, where
95. To show that the patent maps on to the standard (A=B), courts
take into consideration ―claim charts‖, which show that the claims
of a patent are also present in the technical features of a standard.
96. To show that the implementer's device conforms to the standard
(B=C), courts can either consider authentic sources like test reports
which show that the device conforms to the standard. However, this
is not a necessary requirement, as most devices declare their
compliance with a given standard. For instance, all mobile phones
declare that they are 3G/4G/5G compliant.
97. The indirect test for proving Standard Essential Patent
infringement is decades‘ old. For instance, the US Court of Appeals
for the Federal Circuit in Fujitsu Ltd. v. Netgear Inc., (620 F.32
1321) held:
―We hold that a district court may rely on an industry standard
in analysing infringement. If a district court construes the
claims and finds that the reach of the claims includes any
device that practices a standard, then this can be sufficient for
a finding of infringement. We agree that claims should be
compared to the accused product to determine infringement
However, if an accused product operates in accordance with a
standard, then comparing the claims to that standard is the
same as comparing the claims to the accused product.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
95. It would also be apposite to refer to the judgment of the United States
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in the case of Fujitsu Limited and
Others Versus Netgear Inc.22
, wherein, the Court has laid down in
categorical terms that claims ought to be construed and compared to the
accused product to determine whether the same practices a standard in order
to determine infringement. A patent owner must compare the claims to the
accused products and prove that the accused products implement the
standard. Thus, it has been held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
We hold that a district court may rely on an industry standard in
analyzing infringement. If a district court construes the claims and
finds that the reach of the claims includes any device that practices a
standard, then this can be sufficient for a finding of infringement.
We agree that claims should be compared to the accused product to
determine infringement. However, if an accused product operates in
accordance with a standard, then comparing the claims to that
standard is the same as comparing the claims to the accused
product. We accepted this approach in Dynacore where the court
held a claim not infringed by comparing it to an industry standard
rather than an accused product. An accused infringer is free to
either prove that the claims do not cover all implementations of the
standard or to prove that it does not practice the standard.
xxx xxx xxx
We acknowledge, however, that in many instances, an industry
standard does not provide the level of specificity required to establish
that practicing that standard would always result in infringement.
Or, as with the ‘952 patent, the relevant section of the standard is
optional, and standards compliance alone would not establish that the
accused infringer chooses to implement the optional section. In these
instances, it is not sufficient for the patent owner to establish
infringement by arguing that the product admittedly practices the
standard, therefore it infringes. In these cases, the patent owner
must compare the claims to the accused products or, if appropriate,
prove that the accused products implement any relevant optional
sections of the standard. This should alleviate any concern about the

22 620 F.3d 1321 (Fed. Cir. 2010) – Decision dated 20th September, 2010.
use of standard compliance in assessing patent infringement. Only
in the situation where a patent covers every possible implementation
of a standard will it be enough to prove infringement by showing
standard compliance.
xxx xxx xxx
We agree with the district court that Philips failed to establish a
genuine issue of material fact regarding direct infringement for all but
the four models with corresponding customer service records. Unless
the claim language only requires the capacity to perform a
particular claim element, we have held that it is not enough to
simply show that a product is capable of infringement; the patent
owner must show evidence of specific instances of direct
infringement. Intel Corp. v. U.S. Int‘l Trade Comm‘n, 946 F.2d 821,
832 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (holding that the claim term ―programmable
selection means‖ only required that the infringing product be capable
of infringing); Acco Brands, Inc. v. ABA Locks Mfg. Co., 501 F.3d
1307, 1313 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (holding that the patent owner must show
actual infringement, rather than just the capability to infringe).
The cases cited by Philips are distinguishable from the present case.
In Vita-Mix, there was expert testimony that certain testing and
demonstrations conducted by the defendant constituted direct
infringement. Id. at 1325. There is no equivalent testimony or
evidence here, the manuals and expert testing only show that the
products are capable of infringing, they do not provide evidence of
direct infringement. Further, Ricoh is distinguishable because it dealt
with the presence of non infringing uses rather than direct
infringement. These are two separate requirements for contributory
infringement and Philips must establish both. We hold that Philips
failed to establish a genuine issue of material fact regarding direct
infringement for all but the four accused models identified by the
district court as being the subject of the relevant customer service
records.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
96. In another case of Dynacore Holdings Corp. Versus U.S. Philips
Corp.23
, the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has
discussed the steps for determination of patent infringement in reference to
an SEP, in the following manner:

23 363 F.3d 1263 (Fed. Cir. 2004) – Decision dated 31st March, 2004.
―xxx xxx xxx
A determination of patent infringement requires a two-step analysis.
The court must first interpret the claims to determine their scope and
meaning. Cybor Corp. v. FAS Techs., Inc., 138 F.3d 1448, 1454
(Fed.Cir.1998) (en banc). It must then compare the properly
construed claims to the allegedly infringing device. Id. The first step,
claim construction, is a matter of law that we review de novo. Id. at
1451. The second step is a factual question that we review following
a trial for clear error. Bai v. L & L Wings, Inc., 160 F.3d 1350, 1353
(Fed.Cir.1998). When conducting a de novo review of a district court's
grant of summary judgment, however, we construe the facts in the
light most favorable to the non-movant. Mazzari, 323 F.3d at 1005. To
prove infringement, the patentee must show that the accused device
meets each claim limitation, either literally or under the doctrine of
equivalents. Deering, 347 F.3d at 1324. See also Cole v. KimberlyClark Corp., 102 F.3d 524, 532 (Fed.Cir.1996).
In order to prove vicarious liability for indirect infringement, a
plaintiff who demonstrates direct infringement must also establish that
the defendant possessed the requisite knowledge or intent to be held
vicariously liable. Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Bausch & Lomb, 909 F.2d
1464, 1469 (Fed.Cir.1990); Moba v. Diamond Automation, 325 F.3d
1306, 1318 (Fed.Cir. [*1274] 2003).5 Determinations of knowledge
or of intent relevant to patent law issues pose challenging factual
determinations that we review after a trial to ascertain whether the
trial court misapplied the law, made clearly erroneous findings of fact,
or abused its discretion. See Molins PLC v. Textron, 48 F.3d 1172,
1182 (Fed.Cir.1995). When we review such factual determinations de
novo following a summary judgment, we construe all facts in the light
most favorable to the non-movant. Mazzari, 323 F.3d at 1005.
G. Claim Construction
Dynacore is collaterally estopped from challenging the Special
Master's claim construction that we affirmed in Datapoint, 31
Fed.Appx. at 687. Del Mar Avionics, 836 F.2d at 1324. The entire
analysis of direct infringement therefore rests on the factual
comparison of each of the claim limitations to the accused device.
See Bai, 160 F.3d 1350; Deering, 347 F.3d at 1324.
H. Vicarious Liability and Indirect Infringement
To prevail under a theory of indirect infringement, Dynacore must
first prove that the defendants' actions led to direct infringement of
the '732 Patent. Met-Coil Sys. Corp. v. Korners Unlimited, Inc., 803
F.2d 684, 687 (Fed.Cir.1986). Dynacore's briefs evince confusion
about how to demonstrate direct infringement as the first step towards
establishing a defendant's vicarious liability. Dynacore asserts, for
example, that "[t]he district court's decision rests on one network
configuration. That configuration is a non-optimum configuration
where a common node may rest between enhanced nodes[.]"
Appellant Br. at 39. Dynacore similarly complains that "[t]he district
court disregarded a configuration where all nodes are enhanced or
where the common node is at the end of the physical network." Id. at
39 n. 3. Dynacore thus seeks to establish the defendants' broad
vicarious liability by showing that a particular configuration of the
defendants' products, compliant with the IEEE 1394 Standard,
would directly infringe the '732 Patent. In other words, Dynacore
alleges that a hypothetical direct infringement suffices to establish
the defendants' broad vicarious liability across the entire category of
IEEE 1394 compliant networks.
This argument conflates two distinct requirements for establishing
vicarious liability for indirect infringement. A defendant's liability for
indirect infringement must relate to the identified instances of direct
infringement. Plaintiffs who identify individual acts of direct
infringement must restrict their theories of vicarious liability — and
tie their claims for damages or injunctive relief — to the identified act.
See, e.g., Dow Chem. Co. v. Mee Indus., 341 F.3d 1370 (Fed.Cir.2003)
(plaintiff alleged direct infringement of its method patent by defendant
Florida Power Corp., and induced or contributory infringement by
defendant Mee Industries, who supplied the equipment used in the
direct infringement); RF Del., Inc. v. Pac. Keystone Techs., Inc., 326
F.3d 1255 (Fed. Cir.2003) (holding that if plaintiff could establish, on
remand, that defendant's customers had used defendant's products to
directly infringe plaintiff's method patent, defendant could be held
liable for either inducement to infringe or contributory infringement).
Plaintiffs who identify an entire category of infringers (e.g., the
defendant's customers) may cast their theories of vicarious liability
more broadly, and may consequently seek damages or injunctions
across the entire category. See, e.g., Anton/Bauer, Inc. v. PAG, Ltd.,
329 F.3d 1343 (Fed.Cir.2003) (plaintiff whose patent [*1275] covered
a two-component system who sold the components separately alleged
that the vendor of a single unpatented component was vicariously
liable under either § 271(b) or (c) for direct infringement by
consumers who assembled the patented system from one of the
plaintiff's components and one of the defendant's components); Alloc,
Inc. v. ITC, 342 F.3d 1361 (Fed.Cir.2003) (domestic producers filed an
ultimately unsuccessful complaint under 19 U.S.C. § 1337 asserting
that the importation of goods allegedly without a substantial noninfringing use constituted contributory infringement and/or
inducement to infringe).
xxx xxx xxx
Of more direct relevance to Dynacore, however, was the Supreme
Court's explanation that the statutory theories of indirect patent
infringement, as developed through case law, "deny the patentee any
right to control the distribution of unpatented articles unless they
are unsuited for any commercial non-infringing use," id. at 441, 104
S.Ct. 774 (citation omitted), because the "sale of an article which
though adapted to an infringing use is also adapted to other and
lawful uses, is not enough to make the seller a[n indirect] infringer.
Such a rule would block the wheels of commerce." Id. at 442, 104
S.Ct. 774 (citations omitted).
The Sony standard for vicarious infringement liability, which the
Supreme Court imported into copyright law from the narrow patent
law reference to "a staple article or commodity of commerce suitable
for substantial non-infringing use," 35 U.S.C. § 271(c) (emphasis
added), remains a valid articulation of patent law even beyond staple
articles and commodities: The mere sale of a product capable of
substantial non-infringing uses does not constitute indirect
infringement of a patent. See, e.g., Jansen, 342 F.3d at 1332;
Anton/Bauer, 329 F.3d at 1349.
Dynacore must therefore either demonstrate that LANs compliant
with the IEEE 1394 Standard necessarily infringe [*1276] the '732
Patent, or point to a specific instance of direct infringement and
restrict its suit to liability stemming from that specific instance. We
must therefore determine whether all LANs compliant with the
IEEE 1394 Standard directly infringe the '732 Patent, or whether
there may also be substantial non-infringing configurations of
IEEE 1394 compliant networks. We do not reach the defendant's
liability under § 271(b) or (c) if there are substantial non-infringing
uses of the defendants' products and there is no evidence of active
and willful inducement.
xxx xxx xxx
There is nothing in the IEEE 1394 Standard implying that
compliant networks will meet the "equal peers" limitation that is
central to every claim in the '732 Patent. To the contrary, the
requirements of the IEEE 1394 Standard suggest that most if not all
compliant networks will not meet the "equal peers" limitation.
Dynacore has not pointed to even a single network that both
complies with the IEEE 1394 Standard and meets the "equal peers"
limitation, nor has Dynacore presented anything other than
speculation that such a network might actually exist. Dynacore has
raised little other than "a theoretical possibility or `metaphysical
doubt,' which is insufficient to create a genuine issue of material
fact." Jansen, 342 F.3d at 1334 (citing Anderson, 477 U.S. at 261, 106
S.Ct. 2505; Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475
U.S. 574, 106 S.Ct. 1348, 89 L.Ed.2d 538 (1986)).
Dynacore's failure to prove direct infringement by any IEEE 1394
compliant network necessarily dooms its allegations of indirect
infringement, because "[a]bsent direct infringement of the claims of
a patent, there can be neither contributory infringement nor
inducement of infringement." Met-Coil, 803 F.2d at 687. Dynacore
therefore cannot even reach the question of the defendants'
vicarious liability for indirect infringement because the defendants
have shown that their products will allow LAN designers to
configure a substantial number of non-infringing networks. We hold
that the defendants are not liable for direct infringement of the '732
Patent because their products are not LANs with at least three
connected devices, and are not vicariously liable for indirect
infringement of the '732 Patent under either § 271(b) or § 271(c)
because their products are all capable of substantial non-infringing
uses.
Finally, Dynacore argues that the affidavits of its two experts, Kendyl
Roman and Stephen Verderese, create a material factual dispute that
renders summary [*1278] judgment inappropriate. As the district
court noted, however, these experts contribute little other than a
conclusory opinion that nodes that receive a meaningless "data prefix"
signal stripped of message content actually "hear" the
communication, thereby meeting the "equal peers" limitation. It is
well settled that an expert's unsupported conclusion on the ultimate
issue of infringement is insufficient to raise a genuine issue of
material fact, and that a party may not avoid that rule simply by
framing the expert's conclusion as an assertion that a particular
critical claim limitation is found in the accused device. Arthur A.
Collins, Inc. v. N. Telecom Ltd., 216 F.3d 1042, 1046 (Fed.Cir.2000);
Zelinski v. Brunswick Corp., 185 F.3d 1311, 1317 (Fed.Cir.1999);
Phillips Petroleum Co. v. Huntsman Polymers Corp., 157 F.3d 866,
876 (Fed. Cir.1998). Dynacore's expert's opinions are precisely
conclusory assertions, reached using words in ways that contradict
their plain meaning, that a critical claim limitation is found in the
accused device. The district court was correct in ruling that they did
not create a material factual dispute for trial. See, Arthur A. Collins,
216 F.3d at 1046. Summary judgment of non-infringement was fully
warranted.
CONCLUSION
Because the district court correctly identified limitations inherent in
the '732 Patent's parallel architecture that are not met in the IEEE
1394 Standard, we affirm its summary judgment of noninfringement.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
97. In another case of Godo Kaisha IP Bridge 1 Versus TCL
Communication Technology Holdings Limited and Others24, the United
States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has held that the fact that a
patent‟s claims cover an industry standard, does not necessary establish that
all standard-compliant devices implement the standard in the same way.
Further, only where a patent covers mandatory aspects of a standard can
infringement be proved by showing standard compliance, not otherwise.
Thus, it has been held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
……We recognized in Fujitsu that the fact that a patent‘s claims
cover an industry standard does not necessarily establish that all
standard-compliant devices implement the standard in the same
way. And we noted that an asserted patent claim might not cover
all implementations of an industry standard. In such cases, we
guided, infringement must be proven by comparing the claims to
the accused products, or by proving that the accused devices
―implement any relevant optional sections of the standard.‖ Id. at
1328. Thus, Fujitsu teaches that where, but only where, a patent
covers mandatory aspects of a standard, is it enough to prove
infringement by showing standard compliance.
xxx xxx xxx
Determining standard-essentiality of patent claims during claim
construction, moreover, hardly makes sense from a practical point
of view. Essentiality is, after all, a fact question about whether the
claim elements read on to mandatory portions of a standard that
standard-compliant devices must incorporate. This inquiry is
more akin to an infringement analysis (comparing claim elements
to an accused product) than to a claim construction analysis
(focusing, to a large degree, on intrinsic evidence and saying
what the claims mean). As we explained in Fujitsu, one way an
accused infringer can successfully defeat allegations of

24 967 F.3d 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2020) – Decision dated 04th August, 2020.
infringement in the standard essential patent context, is by
rebutting a patentee‘s assertion that its patents are essential to the
standard. 620 F.3d at 1327. This statement would make no sense if
claim construction were sufficient to resolve the question.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
98. The factors relevant to determine the essentiality of a patent, as culled
out from the aforementioned judgments, commentaries and other authorities,
are delineated as follows:
I. Filing of claim mapping charts on record by the patentee, and
mapping the claims of the suit patent to the international standard.
Additionally, it has to be shown that the suit patent corresponds with the
mandatory portions/implementations of the said standard.
II. Expert analysis/affidavit (technical reports) mapping the
contents of a specification of the suit patent to the international
standard, accompanied by a reasoned opinion affirming the essentiality
thereof.
III. Large-scale licensing arrangements which the patentee would
have entered into with various implementers for the patented
technology.
IV. Prior correspondence between the parties, indicating
acknowledgment or admission by the implementer regarding the
essentiality of the suit patent vis-à-vis the relevant international
standard.
V. Acceptance of role/contribution of the patentee of the
technology by relevant trade and industry, including, SSO
documentation at the time of preparation of the international standard
and the contemporaneous technical publications acknowledging the
patentee‟s contribution to the international standard.
VI. Existence of corresponding international patents which have
been formally recognized as „essential‟ or have been issued with an
essentiality certificate by the competent authority.
99. In the present case, the plaintiff has failed to establish the aforesaid
principles/factors in order to prove its claim that the suit patent is an SEP.
The plaintiff has merely averred that the suit patent corresponds to the
ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard, which is mandatory to be used while replicating
VCDs, thereby making the suit patent an SEP.
100. The plaintiff has attempted to map the Claims of the suit patent with
the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard, in the following manner:
101. However, the aforesaid claim mapping chart filed by the plaintiff of its
suit patent with the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard, fails to show that all the
essential elements of the suit patent are covered in the ISO/IEC 11172-3
standard or that the suit patent corresponds to the mandatory portions of the
standard. The essential elements of the suit patent, i.e., a transmission system
comprising a transmitter having an input terminal for receiving the wideband digital signal and a receiver comprising a decoder having an input for
receiving the second digital signal, which decoder has an output coupled to
an output terminal to supply the wide-band digital signal, as constructed in
the paragraphs hereinabove, are not identified or demonstrated in the
ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard.
102. This Court notes that even though claim mapping was done by the
plaintiff herein, it is fundamentally flawed as the same failed to identify or
demonstrate the presence of all essential features of the suit patent in the
defendants‟ product. Moreover, it is also to be noted that, in the present case,
where the essentiality of the suit patent in respect of the ISO/IEC 11172-3
standard has not been accepted by the defendants, the plaintiff ought to have
presented before this Court a standard essentiality report, prepared by an
independent expert, keeping in mind that the present suit is at a post-trial
stage. The plaintiff has failed in this regard and has proceeded to rely only on
its own claim mapping, as extracted hereinabove, which does not establish
that the system claimed in the suit patent maps with the ISO/IEC 11172-3
standard. Thus, the plaintiff has failed to fulfil the basic requirement of
establishing infringement of an SEP, in the absence of construction of the
suit patent as per the claims and proper claim mapping.
103. Further, the plaintiff has not produced in evidence any voluntary
FRAND declaration/terms to SSO. It is also to be noted that the plaintiff has
relied upon certain documents, which are alleged to be standards to prove its
case. The plaintiff has relied upon Ex. P-1/43 and Ex. P-1/44, both of which
are authored by the plaintiff and not by any independent body. It is to be
further noted that none of the documents relied by the plaintiff refer to the
suit patent or to a system having a „transmitter‟ or „receiver‟, characterized in
the Claim 1, which are essential components of the suit patent.
104. Further, even the plaintiff‟s witness PW1 could not identify where the
system of the suit patent was described in the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard.
The relevant portion of the cross-examination of PW1, is reproduced as
under:
―xxx xxx xxx
Q.53 Have you seen the ISO/IEC 11172.3 standards specifications.
A. Yes, I have seen.
Q. 54 If you have seen the specifications please tell me whether this
patent No. 175971 is mentioned in such specification.
A. My answer is two fold. One, a standard is a technical
specification and by that definition not a recital of patent numbers.
Second, the technical content of the standard specification shows
clearly the content of the patent so in that respect the Indian, patent
175971 has been cited in the standard specification.
xxx xxx xxx‖
105. Reference to the aforesaid cross-examination clearly exhibits the
evasive reply given by the plaintiff‟s witness with regard to the ISO/IEC
11172-3 standard. The plaintiff has failed to show that the suit patent for a
„system‟ which consists of a specific „transmitter‟ and „receiver‟
arrangement/framework, is contained in the relevant standard, let alone
mapping the suit patent to the standard.
106. The plaintiff has even failed to place on record any license agreement
with regard to its suit patent being an SEP, as being claimed by the plaintiff.
Rather, during cross-examination, upon being asked about such license
agreements, it was answered that these licenses can be seen on the website of
the plaintiff. The plaintiff failed to produce any single executed license
agreement in this regard. The relevant portions from the cross-examination
of PW1 are reproduced as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
Q.1 Have you placed any document on record of this case to show
that the eleven companies mentioned in your paragraph 11 of the
affidavit are the licensees of the plaintiff.
Ans. These licenses can be seen on the website of plaintiff.
Q.2 I again ask you that have you placed any document on record.
Ans. Since these licenses are visible by entire world that is why we
did not put any document on record.
xxx xxx xxx
Q. 18 Is it correct that you have not placed on record any document to
show as to what royalty rates the plaintiffs are charging worldwide or
from any Indian company?
Ans. IN my affidavit I have referred to letters sent to the defendant
Exhibit P1/19 where clearly royalty rates have been disclosed for
VCD disks and where clearly the statement has been made that the
royalty rate is not negotiable and the standard rate are applicable to
all concerned meaning to all licensees worldwide. IN addition, the
whole world can see the plaintiff applied these royalty rates on a
non-discriminatory basis worldwide as shown on Philips Licensing
website.
xxx xxx xxx‖
 (Emphasis Supplied)
107. The plaintiff has argued that the defendants have not filed a single
document in support of their argument that the suit patent is not an SEP.
Thus, as per the plaintiff, on this ground alone the entire defence is baseless
and the validity of the suit patent is admitted. In this regard, it is to be noted
that the fact that the defendants did not challenge the validity of the suit
patent has no bearing on the present case, as the validity of the suit patent is
not even an issue before this Court. The defendants have, at no point of time,
challenged the validity of the suit patent. The issue before this Court is with
regard to infringement of the suit patent by the defendants, which the
plaintiff has failed to prove.
108. The fact, that the defendants did not lead any evidence, cannot inure to
the benefit of the plaintiff in any manner. The burden to establish the alleged
infringement was on the plaintiff and the plaintiff cannot attempt to draw any
advantage from the weakness in the evidence adduced on the side of the
defendants. (See: Arumugam Rajendra Babu Versus Ashok Leyland
Limited and Ors.25)
109. It is manifest from the aforesaid discussion that the plaintiff has failed
to establish as to how the suit patent corresponds to the mandatory portions
of the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard, and in what manner. Further, the plaintiff
has not claimed monopoly over the process of compression of information in
the VCD. Except bald averments that the audio packed on defendants‟ VCD

25 MANU/TN/6663/2024 – Para 65.
is as per the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard, it has not been established by the
plaintiff that the data/information packed on the Master Discs, used by the
defendants for replication, was as per the aforesaid standard. Thus, the
essentiality of the suit patent has not been proved or established by the
plaintiff.
110. This Court notes that in a claim of infringement of an SEP, the factum
of infringement can also be established by way of „Indirect Method‟. In the
present case, the plaintiff has attempted to do so. However, having held that
the plaintiff has failed to establish the essentiality of its suit patent, the
factum of infringement was required to be proved by the „Direct Method‟ or
by way of „Doctrine of Equivalents‟.
111. As this Court has already addressed hereinabove that the plaintiff has
neither constructed nor mapped its claims onto the product of the defendants,
therefore, the plaintiff has not been able to show literal infringement by use
of the „Direct Method‟ as well.
112. As regards the „Doctrine of Equivalents‟, the Supreme Court of United
Kingdom in the case of Actavis UK Ltd. Versus Eli Lilly and Co.26
, has held
as under:
―xxx xxx xxx
66. … While the language of some or all of the questions may
sometimes have to be adapted to apply more aptly to the specific facts
of a particular case, the three reformulated questions are as follows:
(i) Notwithstanding that it is not within the literal meaning of the
relevant claim(s) of the patent, does the variant achieve
substantially the same result in substantially the same way as the
invention i.e. the inventive concept revealed by the patent?
(ii)Would it be obvious to the person skilled in the art, reading the
patent at the priority date, but knowing that the variant achieves

26 [2017] Bus LR 1731 : [2018] All ER 171 : [2017] UKSC 48.
substantially the same result as the invention, that it does so in
substantially the same way as the invention?
(iii) Would such a reader of the patent have concluded that
the patentee nonetheless intended that strict compliance with the
literal meaning of the relevant claims of the patent was an essential
requirement of the invention?
In order to establish infringement in a case where there is no literal
infringement, a patentee would have to establish that the answer to
the first two questions was ‗yes‘ and that the answer to the third
question was ‗no‘.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
113. It is apparent that though the plaintiff has shown that the data packed
on the VCD, i.e., the end result, is „substantially similar‟, however, it has not
been able to show that the said data was packed in a „substantially similar‟
way, i.e., as per the system claimed in the suit patent. Thus, the factum of
infringement by the defendants has not been established by the plaintiff, in
any manner.
Prior Correspondence between the Parties
114. As regards the aspect of prior correspondence between the parties, the
plaintiff cannot seek to take any advantage of the said correspondence
between the parties, as the same cannot be considered as admissible
evidence, to show any kind of admission on the part of the defendants. While
the plaint is based on a single patent, each and every letter addressed by the
plaintiff talks about „Philips Patents‟, indicating that there are several patents
and not one particular patent, as asserted in the plaint. This Court takes note
of the submission made on behalf of the defendants that since the plaintiff
represented its patents as being „essential patents‟, the defendants bonafidely
and without prejudice entered into negotiations with the plaintiff. It is the
categorical stand of the defendants that they entered into negotiations
„without prejudice‟ to their rights and contentions based on the
representations made by the plaintiff that its patents are „essential patents‟
and the entire correspondence took place in relation to a pool of „Philips
Patents‟.
115. It is the case of the plaintiff that the defendants have not used the
expression „without prejudice‟ in their correspondence with the plaintiff. In
this regard, it is to be noted that the Courts have consistently held that even if
the word „without prejudice‟ is not written, the intention of negotiation
correspondence is always „without prejudice‟. Reference in this regard may
be made to the judgment of Division Bench of this Court in Sonia Magu and
Others Versus Commissioner of Income-tax27
, wherein, it has been held as
follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
12. A conjoint reading of these two notes clearly demonstrates that the
assessee maintained her stand that she had been able to account for
the entire jewellery including the source thereof. Notwithstanding the
same only with a desire to buy peace and avoid litigation, she had
offered 20 per cent. of the excess jewellery i.e., a sum of Rs. 4,59,200.
This offer was thus conditional. She would have paid the tax on the
aforesaid amount had the Assessing Officer accepted the offer thereby
giving a quietus to the matter. Instead as pointed above, the Assessing
Officer ignored this offer and proceeded to deal with the matter on the
merits and fastened the liability of much higher amount upon the
assessee. In these circumstances, the assessee was constrained to take
up the matter in detail. She maintained her stand that she had proper
explanation for the purchase of the aforesaid jewellery. Her stand was
vindicated inasmuch as the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals)
accepted her explanation in respect of the entire jewellery valued at
Rs. 22,96,000. Once the assessee was able to duly explain the source
of purchase of the entire disputed jewellery, we are of the opinion that
the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) committed an error in
falling back on the conditional offer given by the assessee before the

27 2009 SCC OnLine Del 2366.
Assessing Officer along with the return in Form 2B. From the
language of the offer given, it is clear that it was a without prejudice
offer and was not in the nature of "admission on the basis of which
she could be fastened with the liability which otherwise did not
exceed". The provisions of section 23 of the Indian Evidence Act
would clearly be applicable in such a case. This section reads as
under:
―23. Admission in civil cases, when relevant.—In civil cases no
admission is relevant, if it is made either upon an express
condition that evidence of it is not to be given, or under
circumstances from which the court can infer that the parties
agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
116. It is also to be noted that the correspondence between the parties took
place between June, 2001, to February, 2004, with a total exchange of 16
letters, between the parties. Of these, 11 letters were addressed by the
plaintiff and 5 letters were addressed by the defendants. However, none of
the letters written by the plaintiff disclose any patent numbers or details
relating to the kind of patents held by the plaintiff.
117. Further, the contention of the plaintiff that in their letter dated 18th
December, 2003, Ex. P1/18, the defendants have admitted that the patents of
the plaintiff are essential patents, cannot be accepted. The said letter by the
defendants was in reply to letter dated 12th December, 2003, Ex. P1/17,
written by the plaintiff to the defendants, wherein, the plaintiff had asserted
the requirement of taking the relevant patent license from the plaintiff.
Therefore, mere reference by the defendants to the patents of the plaintiff as
„essential‟, as per the claim of the plaintiff, does not in any manner indicate
any admission on part of the defendants that the suit patent asserted by the
plaintiff, was an SEP. This fact assumes more importance in view of the fact
that the plaintiff did not mention any particular patent in its correspondence
and always referred to „Philips Patents‟. In the absence of any particular
patent being referred by the plaintiff, specifically the suit patent, and in the
absence of any clear correspondence in that regard, no admission can be
presumed in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.
118. In this regard, reference may be made to the judgment in the case of
Peacock Plywood (P) Ltd. Versus Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.28, wherein,
adjudging that correspondence will be protected by „without prejudice‟
privilege, if it is written for the purpose of settling the dispute, it was held as
under:
―xxx xxx xxx
43. In Phipson on Evidence, 16th Edn., pp. 655-57, it is stated:
―Without prejudice privilege is seen as a form of privilege and
usually treated as such. It does not, however, have the same attributes
as the law of privilege. Privilege can be waived at the behest of the
party entitled to the privilege. Without prejudice privilege can only
normally be waived with the consent of both parties to the
correspondence. Whilst the rule in privilege is ‗once privileged,
always privileged‘, the rule for without prejudice is less
straightforward, and at least in three-party cases, this will not always
be the position. A third distinction is that in the three-party situation,
which is not governed by contract, without prejudice documents are
only protected in circumstances where a public policy justification
can be provided, namely, where the issue is whether admissions were
made. That is not a principle applicable in the law of privilege.
Fourthly, whereas legal professional privilege is a substantive right,
without prejudice privilege is generally a rule of admissibility, either
based on a contractual or implied contractual right, or on public
policy. This may have consequences relevant to proper law issues.
Finally, if a party comes into possession of a privileged document,
subject to equitable relief for breach of confidence, there is no reason
why he should not use it and it will be admissible in evidence. But, the
mere fact that a party has a without prejudice document does not
entitle him to use it without the consent of the other party.
(c) When is correspondence treated as within the rule?

28 (2006) 12 SCC 673.
The first question is to determine what communications attract
without prejudice privilege. The second stage is to consider when the
court will, nevertheless, admit such communications.
Correspondence will only be protected by without prejudice
privilege if it is written for the purpose of a genuine attempt to
compromise a dispute between the parties. It is not a precondition
that the correspondence bears the heading without prejudice. If it is
clear from the surrounding circumstances that the parties were
seeking to compromise the action, evidence of the content of those
negotiations will, as a general rule, not be admissible. The converse
is that there are some circumstances in which the words are used but
where the documents do not attract without prejudice privilege. This
may be because although the words without prejudice were used, the
negotiations were not for the purpose of a genuine attempt to settle the
dispute. The most obvious cases are first, where the party writing was
not involved in genuine settlement negotiations, and secondly, where
although the words were used, they were used in circumstances which
had nothing to do with negotiations. Surveyors' reports, for example,
are sometimes headed without prejudice, although they have nothing
to do with negotiations. The third case is, where the words are used in
a completely different sense. Thus, in Council of Peterborough v.
Mancetter Developments, the documentation was admissible because
in context the words meant ‗without prejudice to an alternative right
and without concession to the other application‘ and had nothing to
do with settlement.
There are circumstances in which the correspondence is initiated
with a view to settlement but the parties do not intend that the
correspondence should be without prejudice. It may be that the parties
positively want any subsequent court to see the correspondence and
always had in mind that it should be open correspondence. It may be a
nice point whether negotiations at which no one mentioned the words
‗without prejudice‘ should be admitted in evidence: for example at an
early meeting between the parties when the dispute first developed.
There is no easy rule here. On the other hand, even when a letter is
sent as the ‗opening shot‘ in negotiations, and is not preceded by
any previous correspondence, it may be without prejudice. There are
authorities in both directions on this and it will depend on the facts.
It has been said that if one is seeking to change the basis of the
correspondence from without prejudice to open it is incumbent on that
person to make the change clear, although that may be more a pointer
than a rule. There is no reason why every letter for which without
prejudice is claimed should contain an offer or consideration of an
offer, so long as the without prejudice correspondence is part of a
body of negotiation correspondence.‖
without prejudice is claimed should contain an offer or
consideration of an offer, so long as the without prejudice
correspondence is part of a body of negotiation correspondence.‖
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
119. Similarly, holding that a mere suggestion for the purpose of arriving at
a settlement cannot be considered to be an admission, in the case of UTO
Nederland B.V. and Another Versus Tilaknagar Industries Ltd.29
, it was
held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
65.⁠ ⁠Dr. Tulzapurkar's reliance on a letter dated 2nd/3rd April 2007
which purports to record what transpired at a meeting between the
parties is of no assistance either. These meetings were also held in
the course of negotiations between the parties. Thus, the mere fact
that it is recorded that at the meeting the defendant came up with a
proposal to buy the brands for a fair compensation cannot be
considered an admission on the defendant's part that it was not the
proprietor of the marks. It is important to note that in the said letter
dated 15th December, 2003, and another letter dated 9th June, 2005,
the defendant had expressly asserted its title to the said marks. In the
communication dated 9th June, 2005, the defendant stated that it was
the proprietor of the said marks in India and had generated goodwill
therein. The defendant had also made an application for registration
of the marks in its name by this time. The suggestion to buy the
brands was, therefore, obviously only for the purpose of arriving at a
settlement and cannot be considered to be an admission that the
defendant had no title to the marks.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
120. Likewise, ruling that the parties are often willing to make admissions
for the purpose of affecting a compromise, to which it would be unfair to
hold them if the compromise falls through, in the case of Sri Bauribandhu

29 2011 SCC OnLine Bom 2127.
Mohanty and Another Versus Sri Suresh Chandra Mohanty and Others30
,
it was held as follows:
―xxx xxx xxx
10. The Opposite Parties have relied on a decision the Division Bench
of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Shib Charan
Das v. Gulabchand Chhotey Lal AIR 1936 All 157, wherein the High
Court has held thus (at page 158):
―xx xx xx. Negotiations were being conducted with a view to
settlement, and that being so, we are bound to hold that these
negotiations were conducted ‗without prejudice‘. In such
circumstances it is not open for one of the parties to give
evidence of an admission made by another. If negotiations
are to result in a settlement each side must give away a
certain amount. If one of the parties offers to take something
less than what he later claims he is legally entitled, such must
not be used against him; otherwise could not make offers
during negotiations with a view to a settlement. xx xx‖
The same view was taken by the High Court of Oudh in the case
of Kuar Nageshar Sahai v. Shiam Bahadur, AIR 1922 Oudh 231,
where a Division Bench of the Court held follows (at page 234):
―xx xx xx. Parties often willing to make admissions for the
purpose of effecting a compromise to which it would be
unfair to hold them if the compromise falls through. xx xx
xx‖
A similar view was also taken in the case of Smt. Surjit
Kaur v. Gurcharan Singh, AIR 1973 Punjab & Haryana 18, in which
the Court held thus (at page 19):
―xx xx xx. In any case, this letter, admittedly, was written
during the period when the compromise talks going on. The
inference drawn by the learned Judge from all these
circumstances was that the letter was written at a time when
the parties had agreed that no evidence would be given
regarding it. That being so, the case will be covered by the
second condition laid down in Section 23, quoted above, and
as such, the husband could claim privilege regarding the same.
It has been ruled in a Bench decision of the Allahabad High
Court in Shibcharan Das v. Firm, Gulabchand Chhotey Lal,
AIR 1936 All 157, that where negotiations were being

30 1991 SCC OnLine Ori 69.
conducted with a view to a settlement, it should be held that
those negotiations were so conducted without prejudice.‖
From this it follows that where the compromise is not binding on the
parties, any recital is of no much value as evidence. The parties are
often willing to make admissions for the purpose of affecting a
compromise to which it would be unfair to hold them if the
compromise falls through.
11. In view of the above discussions, there is no doubt in my mind
that the statements made in the compromise petition even if treated
as valid admissions, were not intended to be treated as evidence by
any of the parties because of failure of the compromise petition. In
view of this both the orders dated 9-8-89 and 19-8-89 passed by the
learned trial Court in the suit rejecting the petitions for recalling P.W.
7 and D.W. 5 for the purpose of getting the compromise petition
exhibited and for getting the admissions on the record, as evidence
being contrary to Section 23 of the Act, it justified.
In the result, the Civil Revisions Nos. 889 and 890 of 1989 are
dismissed, but in the circumstances, there shall be no order as to
costs.
xxx xxx xxx‖
(Emphasis Supplied)
121. Thus, it is clear that the defendants never approached the plaintiff to
seek a license. On the contrary, the plaintiff approached the defendants for a
license, as is evident from the series of correspondence between the parties.
Further, as is evident from the correspondence on record, the defendants
were never informed which specific patent or patents was/were being offered
to be licensed by the plaintiff.
122. The plaintiff‟s reliance on the judgment in the case of Koninklijke
Philips N.V. Versus MAJ (RETD) Sukesh Behl and Another31
, is not
applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case and does not
assist the plaintiff in any manner. The entire analysis and reasoning in the
said judgment rests on the fact that the suit patent therein covered a process

31 2025 SCC OnLine Del 1121.
along with the record carrier obtained from the process. However, in the
present case, as noted above, the suit patent covers a digital transmission
system, which is not a method/process patent, and does not cover the
resultant VCD.
Conclusion – Issue Nos. 4, 5 & 6
123. In view of the aforesaid detailed discussion, it is clear that the „Digital
Transmission System‟ covered in the suit patent is not present/part of the
replication process employed by the defendants to make VCDs. The plaintiff
has not been able to establish infringement by the defendants. The mapping
of the Claims of the suit patent to the ISO/IEC 11172-3 standard done by the
plaintiff is flawed, as the same does not identify which mandatory portions
of the said standard necessitate the use of the suit patent. In the absence of
even bare evidence to prove infringement, the suit has to necessarily fail.
124. Accordingly, Issue Nos. 4 to 6, are decided in the aforesaid terms.
Issue No. 7 - Whether the plaintiff is entitled to claim Rs. 20 lakhs as
damages as claimed by it -- O.P.P.
125. Since the plaintiff has failed to prove infringement by the defendants,
the plaintiff is not entitled to any damages.
Issue No. 8 - To what other relief, if any, is the plaintiff entitled.
126. In view of the overall conspectus of the discussion and findings given
hereinabove, and the fact that the plaintiff has failed to establish any
infringement by the defendants, the plaintiff is not entitled to any relief.
CONCLUSION
127. This Court notes the order dated 10th January, 2012, passed in CCP
No. 135/2004, wherein, the Court had observed that the submissions made
therein by the plaintiff on the aspect of contempt by the defendants as
alleged by the plaintiff, would be taken into consideration at the time of final
disposal of the present suit. Considering the discussion hereinabove, no
directions are required to be passed in that regard.
128. The present suit is without any merit, and is accordingly, dismissed. 