COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: FAO (COMM) 2/2025
DATE: 17.11.2025 
PLAINTIFF: TCNS CLOTHING COMPANY LIMITED
DEFENDANT: SUNIL KUMAR & ANR
JUDGE: Justice ANIL KSHETARPAL & Justice HARISH VAIDYANATHAN SHANKAR 

----JUDGMENT----

The present Appeal, under Order XLIII Rule 1(a) read with
Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 1
, has been
preferred by the Appellant against the Judgement dated 24.09.20242
passed by the learned District Judge (Commercial Court)-02,
Patiala House Court, New Delhi, in Civil Suit (Commercial) No.
696 of 2024 3
, titled "TCNS Clothing Company Limited vs. Sunil
Kumar and Another".

1 CPC
2
Impugned Judgement
3 District Judge
BRIEF FACTS:
2. The short question involved in the present matter pertains to the
interpretation of the term “commercial dispute” as defined under
Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of the Commercial Courts Act, 20154
.
3. Shorn of unnecessary details, the brief facts relevant for
adjudication of the present Appeal are as follows:
i. The parties herein entered into an agreement for the purpose of
leasing out property bearing No. 338/2, Ground Floor, NH-8,
Rangpuri, New Delhi Garden, Mahipalpur, New Delhi5
, for
the purpose of opening a showroom and using the said property
for carrying out the business of a retail showroom/outlet under
the brand of TCNS, vide Lease Deed dated 04.10.20166
, for a
period of nine years with effect from 04.10.2016. As per the
agreement between the parties, the initial rent for the first three
years was ₹3,80,000/- per month, with an increase of 15% every
three years thereafter. The Lease Deed also provided for an
interest-free refundable security deposit of ₹7,60,000/-, which
was liable to be refunded at the time of vacation of the suit
premises.
ii. Unfortunately, the suit premises became the subject matter of
sealing by the concerned authorities, namely, the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi, on 31.05.2018, whereupon the Appellant
terminated the Lease Deed by its communication dated
11.06.2018, with effect from the date of sealing, and thereupon
invoked the relevant provisions of the Lease Deed for refund of
the security deposit.

4 CC Act
5
Subject Property
6 Lease Deed
iii. The Respondents herein failed to repay the said security amount
as sought for, resulting in the filing of Civil Suit (Commercial)
No. 696 of 2022. In the said suit, an Application was preferred
under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the CPC, on the ground that the
suit was liable to be rejected, since according to the
Applicants/Respondents herein, the dispute between the parties
was not a commercial dispute and was not covered under the
provisions of Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act, which only
includes disputes arising out of agreements relating to
immovable property used exclusively in trade or commerce and
thereby qualify as a „commercial dispute‟.
iv. In the said application, the Applicants therein/Respondents
herein relied upon the judgment of the learned Single Judge of
this Court in Soni Dave v. Trans Asian Industries Exposition
Pvt. Ltd.7
. The said application was disposed of by the learned
District Judge by Order dated 21.02.2024, holding therein that
the averments in the suit, prima facie, demonstrated that the suit
property was leased out for a commercial purpose and
essentially involved a commercial transaction between the
parties. While dismissing the Application, the learned District
Judge also referred to and relied upon the Lease Deed in
question to substantiate the conclusion. It appears that the said
order was never challenged.
v. The matter thereafter progressed further before the learned
District Judge, and after hearing the arguments and perusing the
pleadings and the evidence led by the parties, the learned Judge

7
2016 SCC OnLine Del 4282
rendered the Judgement impugned herein in the following
terms:
“11. Before discussing the merits of the present case, it is
necessary to deal with the legal objection raised by defendants that
this Court lacks inherent jurisdiction to entertain and try the present
suit on the ground that the subject matter of the suit does not
constitute 'commercial dispute' within the meaning of Section
2(1)(c) of The Commercial Courts Act, 2015.
12. The term “commercial dispute” is defined in Section 2(1)(c) of
The Commercial Courts Act, 2015 as a dispute arising out of
transactions/relationships as described in Clauses (i) to (xxii)
thereunder. The only clause on which the plaintiff can rely upon
and to which Ld, counsel for the plaintiff has drawn attention of
this Court, is Clause (vii) which reads as under:
“(vii) agreements relating to immovable property used
exclusively in trade or commerce;”
13. Further, the explanation appended to Section 2(1)(c) provides
as under:
“Explanation. A commercial dispute shall not cease to be
a commercial dispute merely because-
(a) it also involves. action for recovery of immovable
property or for realisation of monies out of immovable
property given as security or involves any other relief
pertaining to immovable property;
(b) one of the contracting parties is the State or any of its
agencies or instrumentalities, or a private ipdy carrying
out public functions;”
14. In this regard, it would be necessary to reproduce the relevant
terms and conditions of the lease deed dated 04.10.2016 (Ex.
PW1/3). The relevant portion thereof is extracted here as under:-
“That the LESSORS is granting this Lease to the LESSEE
for the purpose of running a Ready Made Garment Retail
Showroom/Outlet under the brands of TCNS and for no
other purpose whatsoever. The Lessors shall provide the
following facilities before the handover of the possession:-
a. Construction of internally connected floor staircase to
be built from GF to FF to SF.
b. SS Railing & Marble on the staircase leading from GF
to FF to SF.
c. Free Hoarding (FF & SF), Signage & Lollipop space to
be provided by the lessor.
d. Lessor to provide toilet on the SF in working condition.
e. Toughed Glazing on GF, FF, SF.
f. Shutter with locks in working condition.”
18. That the LESSEE shall observe and comply with all
statutory laws including but not limited to the rules,
regulations and bye-laws as are /or may be made
applicable by the Government agencies under the sales
tax, Vat, service tax, income tax, Provident Fund Act,
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, Employees/State
Insurance Act etc., and any other Laws in force with
regard to the said business to be carried on by the
LESSEE. The LESSEE shall be responsible to obtain at its
own cost and expenses all applicable License(s) and
aprovals from the designated Government and or other
Authorities for the running of the said business.”
15. Thus, it is quite evident that the suit premises were leased out
by defendants to the plaintiff for the purpose of running a ready
made garment retail showroom/outlet under the brand of TCNS,
for which the defendants also agreed to provide certain facilities
including Free Hoarding (FF & SF), Signage and Lollipop Space,
besides Shutter with locks in working condition. At the same time,
it was also agreed between the parties that the plaintiff shall
observe and comply with all statutory laws in force with regard to
the business to be carried out by the plaintiff, which shall also be
responsible to obtain all applicable License(s) and approvals from
the designated Government and/or other Authorities for running of
the said business.
In other words, the permission granted by defendants to the
plaintiff for carrying on commercial activity in the suit premises
was essentially made dependent upon obtaining the requisite
License(s) and approvals from the Government Authorities in the
light of applicable law, rules and regulations as are in force.
and regulations as are in force.
16. It is an undisputed position from both the sides that the suit
premises has been sealed by the Local Authority i.e., Municipal
Corporation of Delhi on 31.05.2018, only because same was being
put to commercial use and it was of residential nature. In this
backdrop, this Court agrees with the argument advanced on behalf
of defendants that the suit premises, being residential in nature, as
per Master Plan, cannot partake the character of commercial
property even if same was being used for commercial purposes.
17. The judgment in the case of Jagmohan Behl (supra) relied on
behalf of plaintiff, is entirely distinguishable on facts and
circumstances of the present case. In the said cited judgment,
Division Bench of Hon'ble Delhi High Court dealt with the
interpetation regarding scope and ambit of sub clause (vii) and its
explanation, thereby emphasizing that the disputes relating to
recovery of rent or mesne profit, security deposit, etc., pertaining to
immovable property exclusively used in trade or commerce should
be treated as commercial dispute under the Commercial Courts
Act, 2015. However, in the present case, the question involved is
altogether different in the sense that the suit premises which is
essentially of residential nature as per Master Plan and local laws
of MCD, was leased out for commercial purposes and in this
backdrop, it has to be ascertained as to whether the commercial suit
filed for refund of security deposit would fall within the ambit of
the term ' commercial dispute as provided in Section 2 (1)(c) of
The Commercial Courts Act, 2015.
18. In the case titled as Mrs. Soni Dave (supra), Hon‟ble Delhi
High Court has held as under:-
“15. I may in this regard also observe that a property,
prescribed user whereof as per the law i.e. the Master
Plan and the municipal laws is residential, even if let out
for use exclusively in trade or commerce or when, without
being so let out, is used exclusively in trade or commerce,
the same would still not qualify as an immovable property
used exclusively in trade or commerce within the meaning
of Section 2(1) (c)(vii) of the Commercial Courts Act. The
Commercial Courts Act has brought only disputes arising
out of transactions relating to immovable property used
exclusively in trade or commerce within the ambit of a
commercial dispute. The legislature could not have
intended to bring disputes arising out of transactions
relating to immovable property illegally used exclusively
in trade or commerce within the ambit of commercial
disputes. The principle, as enunciated in the context of the
provisions in the municipal laws, of determination of
rateable value /annual value (for payment of property
tax/house tax on the basis of) the rent at which the
property can reasonably be expected to let, will be
applicable. It has been held that where, under the law i.e.
the Rent Acts, the landlord is prohibited from charging
from the tenant anything more than the standard rent the
municipal authority cannot, determine the rateable value /
annual value at a rent more than the standard rent, even if
the owner / landlord is actually receiving rent more than
standard rent. Reference in this regard can be made to Dr.
Balbir Singh Vs. M.C.D. (1985) / SCC 167. It was held
that the owner / landlord could not reasonably expect to
get more than the maximum rent permitted in law.”
19. The facts of the present case, in the opinion of this Court, are
squarely covered by the above-mentioned observations made by
Hon'ble Delhi High Court. In the case in hand also, the prescribed
use of suit premises as per Master Plan and the municipal laws, is
residential. Thus, even if it was let out by the defendants for being
used exclusively in trade or commerce, the same would still not
qualify as an immovable property used exclusively in trade or
commerce within the meaning of Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of The
Commercial Courts Act, 2015. It is so held accordingly.
20. ⁠In view of the foregoing reasons and the discussions made
herein above, this Court is of the view that since, the subject matter
of the suit does not constitute „commercial dispute‟, and thus, this
Court lacks jurisdiction to entertain and decide the present matter.
Resultantly, the plaint is hereby ordered to be returned to the
plaintiff in terms of Order VII Rule 10 CPC. for being presented as
non commercial suit before the concerned Court of competent
jurisdiction, in accordance with law. It is directed that the plaintiff
shall so present the plaint on or before 15.10.2024 after giving
advance notice thereof to the defendants, in view of the provision
contained in Order VII Rule 10A CPC, if so chosen and advised
under the law.”
4. A perusal of the Impugned Judgement extracted hereinabove
makes it evident that considerable weight was accorded by the learned
District Judge to the judgment of the learned Single Judge of this
Court in Soni Dave (supra).
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANT:
5. Learned counsel for the Appellant would contend that the suit
clearly fell within the ambit of Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act since
the Lease Deed/Agreement pertained to the lease of premises intended
for the purpose of carrying out trade or commerce.
6. He would rely upon the various terms of the Lease Deed to
substantiate that the substratum of the same was commercial and
clearly fell within the four corners of the provisions of Section
2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act.
7. He would further rely upon the Order dated 21.02.2024 of the
learned District Judge by which the application under Order VII Rule
11 of the CPC came to be dismissed, and would contend that the same
operated as res judicata as no challenge had been preferred by the
Respondents herein against the said Order.
8. He would also contend that the learned District Judge was
bound by the earlier decision rendered in the Application under Order
VII Rule 11 of the CPC, since the Court had already held that there
was a prima facie case made out for entertaining the suit under the
provisions of the CC Act.
CONTENTIONS OF RESPONDENTS:
9. Learned counsel for the Respondents would contend that there
is no infirmity in the judgment passed by the learned District Judge.
He would contend that the present matter clearly does not fall within
the ambit of Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act since the said property
was not one which was “used exclusively in trade or commerce”. He
would further contend that the said property was, in fact, a residential
property which was given on lease, and owing to the residential nature
of the same, it could not be used for commercial purposes and thereby
fell foul of the definition of a commercial dispute under Section
2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act.
10. Learned counsel for the Respondents would strenuously urge
that the present matter stood covered by the judgment of the learned
Single Judge in Soni Dave (supra). He would further contend that
since in that judgment it had been held that where an immovable
property, i.e. a residential property is being used exclusively in trade
or commerce, but such use is not sanctioned by the law, i.e., the
residential property is being used illegally in trade or commerce, even
if used exclusively for that purpose, would not permit a dispute in
respect of such property to be brought within the ambit of a
commercial dispute.
ANALYSIS:
11. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their
able assistance, perused the relevant record. For the purpose of
convenience, we consider it necessary to extract the provisions of
Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act as follows:
““commercial dispute” means a dispute arising out of—
(vii) agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively
in trade or commerce;”
12. At the outset, we also consider it appropriate to extract the
relevant portions of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the CC
Act, which read as under:
“INTRODUCTION
The Law Commission of India, in its 253rd Report, had
recommended for the establishment of the Commercial Courts, the
Commercial Division and the Commercial Appellate Divisions in
the High Courts for disposal of commercial disputes of Specified
Value.
The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Bill, 2015 was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha in April, 2015. The Bill was referred
to the Standing Committee by the Rajya Sabha. As Parliament was
not in session and urgent steps were needed to be taken, the
Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial
Appellate Division in High Courts Ordinance, 2015 was
promulgated on 23rd October, 2015.
In the winter session of the Parliament, the Commercial
Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division
of High Courts Bill, 2015 was introduced to replace the said
Ordinance. The Bill was passed in Lok Sabha on 16th December,
2015.
Under the Bill, State governments may constitute, after
consultation with concerned High Courts, Commercial Division
and Commercial Appellate Division in High Courts and
Commercial Courts at district level. The Bill also determines
specified value of the subject-matter of the commercial dispute,
Appeals, transfer of pending suits, etc.
In addition, the Bill also amends the provisions of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The proposal to provide for speedy disposal of high value
commercial disputes has been under consideration of the
Government for quite some time. The high value commercial
disputes involve complex facts and question of law. Therefore,
there is a need to provide for an independent mechanism for their
early resolution. Early resolution of commercial disputes shall
create a positive image to the investor world about the independent
and responsive Indian legal system.
2. The Law Commission of India in its 188th Report had
recommended the constitution of the Commercial Division in each
High Court. Accordingly, the Commercial Division of High Courts
Bill, 2009 was introduced and passed by the Lok Sabha. However,
during the discussion of the aforesaid Bill in the Rajya Sabha,
some Members raised certain issues and in view thereof, the matter
was again referred to the Law Commission of India for its
examination. The Law Commission of India, in its 253d Report,
has recommended for the establishment of the Commercial Courts,
the Commercial Division and the Commercial Appellate Divisions
in the High Courts for disposal of commercial disputes of specified
value.
3. Based on the recommendations of the Law Commission
made in its 253rd Report, a Bill namely, the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High
Courts Bill, 2015 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 24th April,
2015 and the same is at present under the consideration of the
Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice. As provided in the
said Bill, 2015, all the suits, appeals or applications related to
commercial disputes of specified value i.e. one crore or above, are
to be dealt with by the Commercial Courts or the Commercial
Division of the High Court.
4. By way of the Delhi High Court (Amendment) Act,
2015, the ordinary original jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court has
been increased from rupees twenty lakhs to rupees two crore and
there is a provision for transfer of pending case from the Delhi
High Court to District Courts. On the enactment of Commercial
Courts, Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division
of High Courts Bill, 2015, some of the Commercial Disputes which
are to be transferred to the District Courts from the Delhi High
Court may again be required to be transferred to the Commercial
Division of the High Court of Delhi. It would cause delay. in the
disposal of cases as well as inconvenience to the parties and
counsels and may also result in confusion. Therefore, it became
necessary that the provisions of the Delhi High Court
(Amendment) Act, 2015 and establishment of the Commercial
Courts and Commercial Division of the High Courts may be
brought into force simultaneously.
5. As Parliament was not in session and urgent steps were
needed to be taken, the Commercial Courts, Commercial Division
and Commercial Appellate Division in High Courts Ordinance,
2015 was promulgated on 23rd October, 2015.
6. It is proposed to introduce the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High
Courts Bill, 2015 to replace the Commercial Courts, Commercial
Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts
Ordinance, 2015 which inter alia, provides for the following
namely:
(i) constitution of the Commercial Courts at District level
except for the territory over which any High Court is having
ordinary original civil jurisdiction;
(ii) constitution of the Commercial Divisions in those High
Courts which are already exercising ordinary civil jurisdiction
and they shall have territorial jurisdiction over such areas on
which it has original jurisdiction;
(iii) constitution of the Commercial Appellate Division in all
the High Courts to hear the appeals against the Orders of the
Commercial Courts and the Orders of the Commercial
Division of the High Court;
(iv) the minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of such Commercial
Courts and Commercial Division is proposed as one crore
rupees; and
(v) to amend the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as applicable
to the Commercial Courts and Commercial Divisions which
shall prevail over the existing High Courts Rules and other
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 so as to
improve the efficiency and reduce delays in disposal of
commercial cases.
7. The proposed Bill shall accelerate economic growth, improve
the international image of the Indian Justice delivery system, and
the faith of the investor world in the legal culture of the nation.
8. The Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance.”
13. The provisions of the CC Act, and in particular, Section
2(1)(c)(vii), received considerable and detailed attention by the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the judgment of Ambalal Sarabhai
Enterprises Ltd. v. Kanoria Chemicals and Industries Ltd.
8
. We
would consider it necessary to extract the relevant paragraphs of the
said judgment, which are as follows:
“10. Be that as it may, the learned Senior Advocates on both sides
have sought to rely on the legal position decided by the various
High Courts in the absence of the pronouncement of this Court.
The learned Senior Advocate in that regard have referred to the
various decisions on the same point. However, we do not find it
appropriate to refer to each of them and over burden this order
since we notice that the High Court in fact has referred to various
decisions while deciding the instant case and has thereafter arrived
at its conclusion. The discussion as made by the High Court with
reference to the various decisions is also justified. In that view, we
would refer to the decision of a Division Bench in Jagmohan
Behl v. State Bank of Indore [Jagmohan Behl v. State Bank of
Indore, 2017 SCC OnLine Del 10706] relied on by the learned
Senior Advocate for the appellant. In that regard, it is noticed that

8
(2020) 15 SCC 585
in the said case on taking note of the provision contained in Section
2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act, 2015 it is held that the dispute involved
therein would constitute a commercial dispute and the expression
“arising out of” and “in relation to immovable property” should not
be given the narrow and restricted meaning and the expression
would include all matters relating agreements in connection with
the immovable properties. The said conclusion reached was in a
circumstance where the immovable property in question was
undoubtedly being used for a trade or commerce and it was held so
when the claim in the suit is for recovery of rent or mesne profit,
security deposit, etc. for the use of such immovable property.
11. On the other hand, the learned Senior Advocate for the
respondents has relied on the decision of a Division Bench of the
Gujarat High Court in Vasu Healthcare (P) Ltd. v. Gujarat Akruti
TCG Biotech Ltd. [Vasu Healthcare (P) Ltd. v. Gujarat Akruti
TCG Biotech Ltd., 2017 SCC OnLine Guj 724 : AIR 2017 Guj
153] wherein a detailed consideration has been made and the
conclusion reached therein by taking note of an earlier decision is
that on a plain reading of Section 2(1)(c) of the CC Act, 2015 the
expression “used” must mean “actually used” or “being used”. It is
further explained that if the intention of the legislature was to
expand the scope, in that case the phraseology “likely to be used”
or “to be used” would have been employed. The verbatim
consideration therein is as hereunder: (SCC OnLine Guj para 33)
“33. Therefore, if the dispute falls within any of the
Section 2(c) the dispute can be said to be “commercial
dispute” for which the Commercial Court would have
jurisdiction. It is required to be noted that before the
learned Commercial Court the original plaintiff relied
upon Sections 2(c)(i), 2(c)(ii) and 2(c)(xx) of the
Commercial Courts Act only. The learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the original plaintiff has candidly
admitted and/or conceded that the case shall not fall within
Sections 2(c)(i); 2(c)(ii) or 2(c)(xx) of the Commercial
Courts Act. It is required to be noted that before the
learned Commercial Court it was never the case on behalf
of the original plaintiff that the case would fall within
Section 2(c)(vii) of the learned Commercial Court. Despite
the above we have considered on merits whether even
considering Section 2(c)(vii) of the Commercial Courts
Act, the dispute between the parties can be said to be
“commercial dispute” within the definition of Section 2(c)
of the Commercial Courts Act or not? Considering Section
2(c)(vii), “commercial dispute” means a dispute arising
out of the agreements relating to immovable property used
exclusively in trade or commerce. As observed
hereinabove, at the time of filing of the suit and even so
pleaded in the plaint, the immovable property/plots the
agreements between the parties cannot be said to be
agreements relating to immovable property used
exclusively in trade or commerce. As per the agreement
between the party after getting the plots on lease from the
GIDC, the same was required to be thereafter developed
by the original Defendant 1 and after providing all
infrastructural facilities and sub-plotting it, the same is
required to be given to other persons like the original
plaintiff. It is the case on behalf of the original plaintiff
that as the original Defendant 1 has failed to provide any
infrastructural facilities and develop the plots and
therefore, a civil suit for specific performance of the
agreement has been filed. There are other alternative
prayers also. Therefore, it cannot be said that the
agreement is as such relating to immovable property used
exclusively in trade or commerce. It is the case on behalf
of the original plaintiff that as in clause (vii) of Section
2(c), the phraseology used is not “actually used” or “being
used” and therefore, even if at present the plot is not used
and even if it is likely to be used even in future, in that
case also, Section 2(c)(vii) shall be applicable and
therefore, the Commercial Court would have jurisdiction.
The aforesaid has no substance. As per the cardinal
principle of law while interpreting a particular statute or
the provision, the literal and strict interpretation has to be
applied. It may be noted that important words used in the
relevant provisions are “immovable property used
exclusively in trade or commerce”. If the submission on
behalf of the original plaintiff is accepted in that case it
would be adding something in the statute which is not
there in the statute, which is not permissible. On plain
reading of the relevant clause it is clear that the expression
“used” must mean “actually used” or “being used”. If the
intention of the legislature was to expand the scope, in that
case the phraseology used would have been different as
for example, “likely to be used” or “to be used”. The word
“used” denotes “actually used” and it cannot be said to be
either “ready for use” or “likely to be used”; or “to be
used”. Similar view has been taken by the Bombay High
Court (Nagpur Bench) in Dineshkumar Gulabchand
Agrawal [Dineshkumar Gulabchand Agrawal v. CIT,
2003 SCC OnLine Bom 1289 : (2004) 267 ITR 768] and
it is observed and held that the word “used” denotes
“actually used” and not merely “ready for use”. It is
reported that SLP against the said decision has been
dismissed [Dineshkumar Gulabchand Agrawal v. CIT,
2004 SCC OnLine SC 13] by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court.”
12. Though we are informed that the said decision is assailed
before this Court in a special leave petition we are inclined to agree
with the view expressed therein. This is for the reason that this
Court while examining the issue relating to exclusive land use,
though in the different context has laid emphasis on the present
user of the land either for agriculture or non-agriculture purpose
being relevant. In that regard, the decision relied on by the learned
Senior Advocate for the respondent in Federation of A.P.
Chambers of Commerce & Industry v. State of A.P. [Federation
of A.P. Chambers of Commerce & Industry v. State of A.P.,
(2000) 6 SCC 550] is noticed, wherein it is observed as under:
(SCC pp. 552-53, paras 6 & 9)
“6. Section 3 of the said Act speaks of “land is used for
any industrial purpose”, “land is used for any commercial
purpose” and “land is used for any other non-agricultural
purpose”. The emphasis is on the words “is used”. For the
purposes of levy of assessment on non-agricultural lands
at the rate specified in the Schedule for land used for
industrial purposes, therefore, there has to be a finding as
a fact that the land is in fact in praesenti in use for an
industrial purpose. The same would apply to a
commercial purpose or any other non-agricultural purpose
***
9. We are in no doubt whatever, therefore, that it is only
land which is actually in use for an industrial purpose as
defined in the said Act that can be assessed to nonagricultural assessment at the rate specified for land used
for industrial purposes. The wider meaning given to the
word “used” in the judgment under challenge is untenable.
Having regard to the fact that the said Act is a taxing
statute, no court is justified in imputing to the legislature
an intention that it has not clearly expressed in the
language it has employed.”
13. The learned Senior Advocate for the appellant would however,
contend that a strict interpretation as in the case of taxing statutes
would not be appropriate in the instant case where the issue relates
to jurisdiction. In that regard, the learned Senior Advocate has
referred to the Statement of Objects and Reasons with which the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 is enacted so as to provide speedy
disposal of high value commercial disputes so as to create the
positive image to the investors world about the independent and
responsive Indian legal system. Hence, he contends that a
purposive interpretation be made. It is contended that a wider
purport and meaning is to be assigned while entertaining the suit
and considering the dispute to be a commercial dispute. Having
taken note of the submission we feel that the very purpose for
which the CC Act of 2015 has been enacted would be defeated if
every other suit merely because it is filed before the Commercial
Court is entertained. This is for the reason that the suits which are
not actually relating to commercial dispute but being filed merely
because of the high value and with the intention of seeking early
disposal would only clog the system and block the way for the
genuine commercial disputes which may have to be entertained by
the Commercial Courts as intended by the lawmakers. In
commercial disputes as defined a special procedure is provided for
a class of litigation and a strict procedure will have to be followed
to entertain only that class of litigation in that jurisdiction. If the
same is strictly interpreted it is not as if those excluded will be
non-suited without any remedy. The excluded class of litigation
will in any event be entertained in the ordinary civil courts wherein
the remedy has always existed.
14. In that view it is also necessary to carefully examine and
entertain only disputes which actually answers the definition
“commercial disputes” as provided under the Act. In the instant
case, as already taken note neither the agreement between the
parties refers to the nature of the immovable property being
exclusively used for trade or commerce as on the date of the
agreement nor is there any pleading to that effect in the plaint.
Further the very relief sought in the suit is for execution of the
mortgage deed which is in the nature of specific performance of
the terms of Memorandum of Understanding without reference to
nature of the use of the immovable property in trade or commerce
as on the date of the suit. Therefore, if all these aspects are kept in
view, we are of the opinion that in the present facts the High Court
was justified in its conclusion arrived through the order dated 1-3-
2019 [K.S. Infraspace LLP v. Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd.,
2019 SCC OnLine Guj 1926] impugned herein. The Commercial
Court shall therefore return the plaint indicating a date for its
presentation before the Court having jurisdiction.
***
R. Banumathi, J. (concurring)— I have gone through the
judgment of my esteemed Brother A.S. Bopanna, J. I am in full
agreement with the conclusion that in order to fall within Section
2(1)(c)(vii) of the Commercial Courts Act, the immovable property
must be “used exclusively” or “being used exclusively” in trade or
commerce. However, in view of the importance of the question
involved, I would like to give my reasonings for concurring with
the conclusion of my esteemed Brother.
17. The Commercial Courts, Commercial Division and
Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts Act, 2015 (Act No.
4 of 2016) was published in the Gazette of India on 1-1-2016. The
Act is deemed to have come into force w.e.f. 23-10-2015. Act No.
4 of 2016 was amended by Central Act 28 of 2018, the
Commercial Courts Act.
18. We may refer to the Law Commission's 253rd Report, which
inter alia made various recommendations. Para 4.2 of Chapter
IV—“Conclusions and Summary of Recommendations” of the
Law Commission's 253rd Report reads as under:
“4.2. The Commercial Courts, the Commercial Divisions
and the Commercial Appellate Divisions of High Courts
that have been recommended are intended to serve as a
pilot project in the larger goal of reforming the civil justice
system in India. The goal is to ensure that cases are
disposed of expeditiously, fairly and at reasonable cost to
the litigant. Not only does this benefit the litigant, other
potential litigants (especially those engaged in trade and
commerce) are also advantaged by the reduction in
backlog caused by the quick resolution of commercial
disputes. In turn, this will further economic growth,
increase foreign investment, and make India an attractive
place to do business. Further, it also benefits the economy
as a whole given that a robust dispute resolution
mechanism is a sine qua non for the all-round
development of an economy.” [See Para 4.2 of Chapter
IV—„Conclusions and Summary of Recommendations‟ of
Law Commission's 253rd Report — Commercial Division
and Commercial Appellate Division of High Courts and
Commercial Courts Bill, 2015 (January 2015).]
After the Law Commission's 253rd Report, Act No. 4 of
2016 was amended by Central Act 28 of 2018.”
***
35. Various provisions of the Act, namely, case management
hearing and other provisions makes the court to adopt a pro-active
approach in resolving the commercial dispute. A new approach for
carrying out case management and strict guidelines for completion
of the process has been introduced so that the adjudicatory process
is not delayed. I have referred to the various provisions of the Act
and the Schedule bringing in amendments brought to the Civil
Procedure Code to deal with the commercial disputes, only to
highlight that the trial of the commercial dispute suits is put on fast
track for disposal of the suits expeditiously. Various provisions of
the Act referred to above and the amendments inserted to the Civil
Procedure Code by the Schedule is to ensure speedy resolution of
the commercial disputes in a time bound manner. The intent of the
legislature seems to be to have a procedure which expedites the
disposal of commercial disputes and thus creates a positive
environment for investment and development and make India an
attractive place to do business.
36. A perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 and the various amendments to the
Civil Procedure Code and insertion of new rules to the Code
applicable to suits of commercial disputes show that it has been
enacted for the purpose of providing an early disposal of high
value commercial disputes. A purposive interpretation of the
Statement of Objects and Reasons and various amendments to the
Civil Procedure Code leaves no room for doubt that the provisions
of the Act require to be strictly construed. If the provisions are
given a liberal interpretation, the object behind constitution of
Commercial Division of Courts viz. putting the matter on fast track
and speedy resolution of commercial disputes, will be defeated. If
we take a closer look at the Statement of Objects and Reasons,
words such as “early” and “speedy” have been incorporated and
reiterated. The object shall be fulfilled only if the provisions of the
Act are interpreted in a narrow sense and not hampered by the
usual procedural delays plaguing our traditional legal system.
usual procedural delays plaguing our traditional legal system.
37. A dispute relating to immovable property per se may not be a
commercial dispute. But it becomes a commercial dispute, if it falls
under sub-clause (vii) of Section 2(1)(c) of the Act viz. “the
agreements relating to immovable property used exclusively in
trade or commerce”. The words “used exclusively in trade or
commerce” are to be interpreted purposefully. The word “used”
denotes “actually used” and it cannot be either “ready for use” or
“likely to be used” or “to be used”. It should be “actually used”.
Such a wide interpretation would defeat the objects of the Act and
the fast tracking procedure discussed above.
***
41. In Vasu Healthcare (P) Ltd. v. Gujarat Akruti TCG Biotech
Ltd. [Vasu Healthcare (P) Ltd. v. Gujarat Akruti TCG Biotech
Ltd., 2017 SCC OnLine Guj 724: AIR 2017 Guj 153], referred to
in extenso by my learned Brother, it was held that: (SCC OnLine
Guj para 33)
“33. … On plain reading of the relevant clause, it is clear
that the expression “used” must mean “actually used” or
“being used”. If the intention of the legislature was to
expand the scope, in that case the phraseology used would
have been different as for example, “likely to be used” or
“to be used”. The word “used” denotes “actually used”
and it cannot be said to be either “ready for use” or “likely
to be used”; or “to be used.”
We entirely agree with the above purposive interpretation adopted
by the Gujarat High Court.
42. The object and purpose of the establishment of Commercial
Courts, Commercial Divisions and Commercial Appellate
Divisions of the High Court is to ensure that the cases involved in
commercial disputes are disposed of expeditiously, fairly and at
reasonable cost to the litigants. Keeping in view the object and
purpose of the establishment of the Commercial Courts and fast
tracking procedure provided under the Act, the statutory provisions
of the Act and the words incorporated thereon are to be
meaningfully interpreted for quick disposal of commercial
litigations so as to benefit the litigants especially those who are
engaged in trade and commerce which in turn will further
economic growth of the country. On the above reasonings, I agree
with the conclusion arrived at by my esteemed Brother A.S.
Bopanna, J.”
(emphasis supplied)
14. A reading of the paragraphs extracted hereinabove in Ambalal
Sarabhai (supra) would lead us to conclude that the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court has emphasized on the fact that for the purpose of exercising
jurisdiction under the CC Act and in particular Section 2(1)(c)(vii),
the immovable property must be “actually used” or is “being used”
“exclusively in trade or commerce”. Both the Hon‟ble Judges have
clearly concurred that the manner in which the said section would
need to be construed is based on a determination as to whether the
property was “actually used” or “being used” for the purpose of trade
or commerce.
15. To our mind, the said interpretation is clearly in consonance
with the Statement of Objects and Reasons as well as the intent of the
legislature in promulgating the CC Act. The intent is to ensure that
commercial disputes, as between the parties, would be accorded a
special status and a special infrastructure be created for the purpose of
dealing with and disposing of matters of commercial nature
expeditiously.
16. To our mind, the judgment of the learned Single Judge in Soni
Dave (supra), particularly with respect to the observations in
paragraphs 16 and 17, though perhaps not strictu sensu applicable in
the present case, would nonetheless need to be dealt with. The said
paragraphs are reproduced as under:
“16. I may in this regard also observe that a property, prescribed
user whereof as per the law i.e. the Master Plan and the municipal
laws is residential, even if let out for use exclusively in trade or
commerce or when, without being so let out, is used exclusively in
trade or commerce, the same would still not qualify as an
immovable property used exclusively in trade or commerce within
the meaning of Section 2 (1)(c)(vii) of the Commercial Courts Act.
The Commercial Courts Act has brought only disputes arising out
of transactions relating to immovable property used exclusively in
trade or commerce within the ambit of a „commercial dispute‟. The
legislature could not have intended to bring disputes arising out of
transactions relating to immovable property illegally used
exclusively in trade or commerce within the ambit of commercial
disputes. The principle, as enunciated in the context of the
provisions in the municipal laws, of determination of rateable
value/annual value (for payment of property tax/house tax on the
basis of) the rent at which the property can reasonably be expected
to let, will be applicable. It has been held that where, under the law
i.e. the Rent Acts, the landlord is prohibited from charging from the
tenant anything more than the „standard rent‟ the municipal
authority cannot, determine the rateable value/annual value at a
rent more than the standard rent, even if the owner/landlord is
actually receiving rent more than standard rent. Reference in this
regard can be made to Dr. Balbir Singh v. M.C.D. (1985) 1 SCC
167. It was held that the owner/landlord could not reasonably
expect to get more than the maximum rent permitted in law.
17. Justice G.P. Singh in his „Principles of Statutory
Interpretation‟, 13th Edition in Chapter 5 titled „Subsidiary Rules‟
and under the head „Construction of General Words‟ has referred to
„Principle of Legality‟, as the general words of a statute are not to
be construed as to alter the previous policy of the law, unless no
sense or meaning can be applied to those words consistently with
the intention of preserving the previous policy untouched. It is
further authored that there are many presumptions which an
interpreter is entitled to raise which are not readily displaced
merely by use of general words, unless there is the clearest
provision to the contrary. The Principle of Legality has also been
described as an aspect of the rule of law known both to Parliament
and the Courts, upon which statutory language will be interpreted.
Similarly, in Chapter 2 titled „Guiding Rules‟ and under the head
„The Rule of Literal Construction‟ Lord Macnaghten has been
quoted as opining that „in construing acts of Parliament‟, it is a
general rule that „words must be taken in their legal sense unless
the contrary intention appears.‟
18. Following the said principles, Section 2(1)(c)(vii) has to be
read and interpreted as „immovable property which is in
accordance with law, used exclusively in trade or commerce‟ and
not as „immovable property which, in contravention of law, is used
exclusively in trade or commerce‟.”
17. In the present case, the terms of the Lease Deed clearly provide
that the said property was to be used for trade and commerce, in
particular for the establishment of a showroom for readymade
garments. There are numerous clauses wherein both parties
acknowledge the use and purpose of entering into the said lease. The
Respondents, in fact, also undertook to provide various facilities
which involved construction work for the purpose of facilitating the
running of the readymade garments‟ retail showroom/outlet. The lease
deed also records that the Appellant had already invested a
considerable amount towards making numerous fitments and
modifications to the premises for such commercial use of the
premises. Of particular relevance is Clause 18 of the Lease Deed,
which casts upon the lessee the obligation to comply with the required
statutory laws governing commercial establishments and to obtain, at
its own cost, the requisite licenses and approvals for running the said
business. The relevant extracts of the Lease Deed are reproduced as
under:
“WHEREAS the LESSEE is inter-alia in the business of readymade garments for men and women and is also into manufacture
and sale of Garments under the Brand Name of TCNS and its
related brand.
WHEREAS the LESSEE is desirous of obtaining on Lease from
the LESSORS the Leased Premises, for running a readymade
garments retail showroom under its brand names and has
accordingly approached the LESSORS to give to the LESSEE on
Lease the Leased Premises and the LESSORS has agreed to give
on Lease to the LESSEE the Leased Premises on the terms and
conditions hereinafter contained:
****
12. That the LESSORS is granting this Lease to the LESSEE for the
purpose of running a Ready Made Garment Retail
Showroom/Outlet under the brands of TCNS and for no other
purpose whatsoever. The Lessors shall provide the following
facilities before the handover of the possession:-
a. Construction of internally connected floor staircase to be built
from GF to FF to SF.
b. SS Railing & Marble on the staircase leading from GF to FF to
SF.
c. Free Hoarding (FF & SF), Signage & Lollipop space to be
provided by the lessor.
d. Lessor to provide toilet on the SF in working condition.
e. Toughed Glazing on GF, FF, SF.
f. Shutter with locks in working condition
*****
18. That the LESSEE shall observe and comply with all statutory
laws, including but not limited to the rules, regulation and bylaws
as are/or maybe made applicable to the government agencies under
the sales tax, Vat, service tax, income tax, Provident Fund Act,
Standards of Weights and Measures Act, Employees/State
Insurance Act, etc., and any other laws in force with regard to the
same business to be carried on by the LESSEE. The LESSEE shall
be responsible to obtain at its own cost and expenses all applicable
License(s) and approvals from the designated Government and or
other Authorities for the running of the said business.
****
20. That the LESSEE shall at its own cost be entitled to put up
Signage/affix a Board at such place as designated by the LESSORS
in the Leased Premises. However any taxes or duties levied by any
statutory authority for putting such signages will be borne by the
Lessee.
****
22. The LESSEE shall be entitled to trade 24 hours per day, 7 days
a week in accordance to the rules and regulations laid down by the
Statutory Authorities.”
18. As is apparent, the Lease Deed only records that the relevant
permissions/approvals would be applied for, and permission would be
sought for the purpose of running the commercial activity. The
conclusion of the learned Single Judge in Soni Dave (supra) with
respect to the interpretation of Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act,
which is set out at Para 18, to our mind cannot be accepted in the
factual scenario of the present case.
19. As is apparent, there is no absolute prohibition on two parties
entering into an agreement for the purpose of leasing out the premises
for commercial activity. In the present case, although the property is
situated in a residential area, that in itself does not necessarily lead to
the inference that, it could not have been used for running a
commercial establishment. This Court takes judicial notice of the fact
that there are a number of areas where such permissions, if sought for,
have been granted and on the basis of which commercial
establishments are permitted to operate in residential areas.
20. Merely because in the present case, permission had not been
granted or perhaps not sought for, the same would not amount to the
dispute being disqualified from being termed a “commercial dispute”.
We are of the opinion that if the actual agreement as between the
parties relates to the carrying out of some trade or commerce from an
immoveable premises, which activity of trade or commerce itself, is
per se, neither illegal nor prohibited, the mere fact that the agreement
for such an activity pertains to the carrying out of the same from an
immoveable property, where such activity may not be permitted to be
carried out, would not, by itself remove such disputes from the ambit
of the CC Act.
21. We are afraid that we are unable to agree with the observations
in Soni Dave (supra) for the following reasons:
a) Such interpretation, if permitted, would necessarily mean a reengineering of the CC Act itself, meaning thereby that the same
would necessitate the reading of the provisions as “(vii)
agreements relating to immoveable property legally
meant/permitted to be used exclusively in trade or commerce”.
Such a reading, as is well known, is neither possible nor
permissible. The Courts have to give effect to provisions as they
are expressed in the Statute, without reading into it any further
or additional words. The Judgment in Soni Dave (supra)
commends us to read the Statute thus and in our opinion, such a
reading is unsustainable;
b) Assuming that the provision were to be given an extremely
strict reading, then, even areas where “mixed land use” were to
be permitted would not fall within the ambit of the provision,
since the provision reads “used exclusively in trade or
commerce”. In which event, since the said property would be
capable of use for both residential as well as commercial
purposes, the property would fall outside the ambit of the
definition clause.
c) The practical and factual nature of tenancies in India and more
so, in places like Delhi, is such that, large number of
agreements are entered into, for carrying on, trade and
commerce in properties or areas that may not be earmarked for
such purpose. If the statute were to be accorded an
interpretation as espoused in Soni Dave (supra), it would take
out of its ambit a large number of establishments which are
currently in operation, from the provisions of the CC Act. We
do not believe that the legislature was unaware of, or
disconnected from the ground realities. An interpretation that is
in consonance with practical considerations has to be accorded
to the statute and we believe that the Judgment in Soni Dave
(supra) makes a departure from the same.
d) The most important aspect that leads us to disagree with Soni
Dave (supra) is that the illegal or impermissible use of an
immovable property is regulated by the concerned municipal
authority(ies) and enforced by them. Any illegal or
unauthorized use of an immovable property would make a
person using it unauthorizedly, liable to such consequences as
are prescribed under the relevant municipal laws. The alleged
restriction on commercial use of the premises emanates from
municipal or zoning regulations, which are regulatory in nature
and primarily require the obtaining of appropriate licenses and
permits, as has been provided for in Clause 18 of the Lease
Deed. Such restrictions, even if breached, may invite
administrative action, action under the Municipal laws or
necessitate regularization; however, they do not, per se, render
the underlying contract void within the meaning of Section 23
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
22. We are also of the considered view that the observations made
in paragraphs 16 to 18 of the judgment in Soni Dave (supra) appear to
be in the nature of obiter dicta and do not form part of the binding
ratio decidendi.
23. We are also of the view that what seems to have weighed in the
mind of the learned Single Judge in Soni Dave (supra) was that there
was no pleading that the transaction related to an immovable property
was used exclusively for trade or commerce.
24. Further, we find no merit in the contention of the Respondents
that the lease in question cannot be regarded to be of commercial use
on the ground that the said property is residential in nature. Having
consciously executed a Lease Deed permitting the Appellant to use the
premises for commercial purposes and having continued to receive
rent thereunder, as also permitting the Appellant to carry out
modifications and alterations and having carried out certain works for
facilitating the use of the premises as a Garment showroom, the
Respondents cannot now be heard to plead that such use was
impermissible. The principle embodied in the maxim nullus
commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria - no man can take
advantage of his own wrong - squarely applies. The Hon‟ble Supreme
Court in Eureka Forbes Ltd. v. Allahabad Bank 9
, observed the scope
and content of this maxim in the following terms:

9
(2010) 6 SCC 193
“66. The maxim nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua
propria has a clear mandate of law that, a person who by
manipulation of a process frustrates the legal rights of others,
should not be permitted to take advantage of his wrong or
manipulations. In the present case Respondents 2 and 3 and the
appellant have acted together while disposing off the hypothecated
goods, and now, they cannot be permitted to turn back to argue,
that since the goods have been sold, liability cannot be fastened
upon Respondents 2 and 3 and in any case on the appellant. The
Bench of this Court in Ashok Kapil v. Sana Ullah [(1996) 6 SCC
342] referred to rule of mischief and while explaining the word
“building”, held as under: (SCC p. 346, para 11)
“11. Stroud's Judicial Dictionary (Vol. I of the 5th
Edn.) states that „what is a building must always be a
question of degree and circumstances‟. Quoting
from Victoria City Corpn. v. Bishop of Vancouver
Island [(1921) 2 AC 384 (PC)] (AC at p. 390), the
celebrated lexicographer commented that „the ordinary
and natural meaning of the word “building” includes the
fabric and the ground on which it stands‟. In Black's Law
Dictionary (5th Edn.) the meaning of „building‟ is given as
„A structure or edifice enclosing a space within its walls,
and usually, but not necessarily, covered with a roof‟.
(emphasis in original). The said description is a
recognition of the fact that roof is not a necessary and
indispensable adjunct for a building because there can be
roofless buildings. So a building, even after losing the
roof, can continue to be a building in its general meaning.
Taking recourse to such general meaning in the present
context would help to prevent a mischief.”
25. Having themselves executed and derived benefit under a lease
for commercial use of the premises, the Respondents are estopped and
cannot now be permitted to disavow the commercial nature of the
terms of the lease.
26. The application of the principle of illegality in running a
business from a premises not meant “exclusively for trade or
commerce” as espoused in Soni Dave (supra) may not stricto sensu,
apply to the present case, since it is not as if the Lease Deed was
premised on a complete or absolute prohibition on the carrying out of
any commercial activity and the apparent impossibility of such
commercial activity being permissible in the premises, in the event of
approval, if sought for, were granted by the concerned authority.
27. We re-iterate that the interpretation that requires to be accorded
to Section 2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act would have to be synoptic to the
practical considerations of commercial activity as carried out across
the country and that in the event that we were to approve the
interpretation as accorded to the provisions in Soni Dave (supra), it
would lead to a situation where a large number of disputes pertaining
to commercial arrangements as between the parties, which are or have
been carried out in various localities, at least in Delhi, would
effectively be shunted out or excluded from the purview of the CC
Act.
28. In any event, given the facts of the present case, considering
that neither party believed that the property in question was
conclusively unavailable for commercial use, to hold that the dispute
raised herein would not fall within the domain of the CC Act is
unjustified.
29. We once again reiterate the principles and the interpretation as
accorded to the said provision in Ambalal Sarabhai (supra), which
upheld the judgment of the Hon‟ble High Court of Gujarat in Vasu
Healthcare Private Limited v. Gujarat Akruti TCG Biotch Limited10
,
where the Hon‟ble Supreme Court has clearly held that what needs to
be considered is the purpose for which the property was “actually
used”. Since, admittedly, in the present case, the leased premises were
actually used for trade and commerce (Garment Showroom), the
dispute herein would fall within the four corners of Section
2(1)(c)(vii) of the CC Act.

10 2017 SCC OnLine Guj 724
30. Resultantly, the present Appeal is allowed and the Impugned
Judgement passed by the learned District Judge is set aside.
31. The present Appeal, along with the pending applications, if any,
stands disposed of in the above terms.