COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: FAO (COMM) 245/2024
DATE: 23.09.2025
PLAINTIFF: CHAND MEHRA & ANR
DEFENDANT: BRITISH AIRWAYS PLC
JUDGE: Chief Justice DEVENDRA KUMAR UPADHYAYA & Justice TUSHAR RAO GEDELA

----JUDGMENT-----

The appellants-plaintiffs by instituting the instant appeal challenges
an order dated 14.11.2024 passed by the learned District Judge (Commercial
Court-03), South-East, Saket Courts, Delhi, whereby an application moved
by the respondent/defendant under Order VII Rule 10 & Rule 11 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as CPC) has been allowed
and the learned Commercial Court below has ordered for return of the plaint
to the appellants-plaintiffs with liberty to file the same before a Court of
competent jurisdiction.
2. By means of the order under appeal the learned Commercial Court
has passed the order for returning the plaint under Order VII Rule 10 CPC
holding that the nature of dispute raised in the suit filed by the appellants-
plaintiffs does not in any manner constitute commercial dispute within the
meaning of the said term under Section 2 (1) (c) of the Commercial Courts
Act, 2015 (hereinafter referred to as Act) and as such the Commercial Court
does not have any jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
3. A suit bearing CS (COMM) 185/2024 was filed by the
appellants/plaintiffs with the prayer for passing a decree for recovery of
Rs.5,09,918/- against the respondent-defendant, along with interest of
Rs.63,872/- @ 18% per annum on the principal amount of Rs.5,09,918/- to
be calculated from 29.05.2023 till 10.03.2024. The appellants-plaintiffs also
prayed for award of pendente lite and future interest @ 18% per annum from
10.03.2024 till the date of payment, along with costs. It was also prayed that
the respondent-defendant be saddled with payment of punitive damages to
the tune of Rs.10,19,836/- for allegedly indulging in unethical and tortious
conduct in order to earn unjust enrichment at the expense of plaintiffsappellants.
4. The suit was filed with the assertion in the plaint that appellantsplaintiffs had reserved two seats with the respondent-defendant for their air
travel from New Delhi to New York on 02.06.2023 and for return from New
York to New Delhi on 05.07.2023, whereafter they purchased two business
class air tickets from the respondent-defendant for an amount of
Rs.5,09,918/-. As per the assertion in the plaint, in early May, 2023 mother
of the appellant no.1, who is 80 years of age, was admitted to the Intensive
Care Unit (ICU) of a hospital in Delhi and thereafter she was advised to take
further medical care at home and because of these circumstances the
appellants-plaintiffs decided to cancel their travel to New York.
5. The appellants-plaintiffs further asserted in the plaint that an e-mail
was sent to the respondent-defendant on 01.06.2023 to cancel the tickets,
which was followed by another e-mail requesting refund of the tickets on
06.06.2023. It was also stated by the appellants-plaintiffs that they followed
up the matter with the Call Centre of the respondent-defendant, requesting
for refund of the tickets; however, it was informed to them by the
respondent-defendant that in the event the appellants-plaintiffs seek a refund
of the tickets, they will be levied cancellation charges of Rs.3,05,042/- and
shall refund a sum of Rs.2,04,876/-. Various other assertions were also
made in the plaint stating that levying cancellation charges of Rs.3,05,042/-
was contrary to rules and regulations framed by the Directorate General of
Civil Aviation/Ministry of Civil Aviation. It was stated further that the
appellants-plaintiffs were informed that instead of issuing the refund of
Rs.5,09,918/-, the respondent-defendant converted the said amount into a
Future Travel Voucher (FTV) to be utilised in case of any future travel.
6. A legal notice was sent on 09.10.2023 to the respondent/defendant
calling upon it to refund the full value of the tickets, i.e. Rs.5,09,918/-,
along with interest @ 18% per annum from the date the refund was sought
till payment, within seven days of the receipt of the legal notice. To the said
legal notice, the appellants-plaintiffs are said to have received a response
letter confirming receipt of the legal notice dated 09.10.2023 and further
stating that the same shall be responded to shortly. On 31.10.2023, the
appellants-plaintiffs filed an application for pre-institution mediation with
South East District Legal Services Authority at Saket District Court,
however, despite putting in appearance in the said proceedings, the
respondent-defendant did not provide any response, leaving the appellants-
plaintiffs with no option but to institute the legal proceedings, and it is in
these circumstances that the suit was filed. The respondent-defendant filed a
written statement denying the plaint averments and also raising a
preliminary objection on the maintainability of the suit, stating therein that
transaction in question is not a commercial transaction and therefore, the
claim of the appellants-plaintiffs was not governed within Section 2 (1) (c)
of the Act.
7. An application was also moved by the respondent-defendant under
Order VII Rule 10 and/or Rule 11 CPC with the prayer that having regard to
the fact that the dispute between the parties does not qualify to be a
commercial dispute within Section 2 (1) (c) of the Act, the plaint may be
returned under Order VII Rule 10 of the CPC to be filed before the Court of
competent jurisdiction or the same be rejected under Order VII Rule 11
CPC. It is this application on which the order under appeal has been passed
by the learned Commercial Court on 14.11.2024, whereby the suit has been
held to be not maintainable and accordingly it has been ordered to be
returned to the appellants-plaintiffs with liberty to file the same before a
Court of competent jurisdiction.
8. The Court below relying upon the judgment of the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court in Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Limited v. K.S. Infraspace LLP &
Anr. [(2020) 15 SCC 585] has held that the dispute raised in the suit does
not fall in any manner under a commercial dispute, and as such Court further
ordered for return of the plaint with liberty to file the same before the court
of competent jurisdiction.
9. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also
perused the records available before us on this appeal.
10. The sole question which falls for our consideration in this appeal is as
to whether the nature of dispute raised by the appellants-plaintiffs by
instituting the proceedings of the commercial suit constitutes any
commercial dispute within the meaning of the said expression occurring
under Section 2 (1) (c) of the Act or not.
11. Learned counsel for the appellants-plaintiffs has heavily relied upon
Section 2 (1) (c) (xviii) of the Act according to which agreement for sale of
goods or provision of service constitute a commercial dispute, and since the
issue raised in the suit of the appellants-plaintiffs related to services to be
provided by the respondent-defendant as such, the dispute would fall within
the meaning of “commercial dispute” and accordingly the learned
Commercial Court has erred in law in holding that the dispute in question is
not a commercial dispute.
12. Elaborating further, it has been argued on behalf of the appellantsplaintiffs that Section 2 (1) (c) (xviii) contains two phrases, namely, one,
agreement for sale of goods and second, provision of services. It is further
submitted that once the tickets were booked by the plaintiffs-appellants for
travel from New Delhi to New York, it confirms a contract containing
provision of services would be provided by the respondent-defendant as
such the dispute shall be covered by commercial dispute as defined in
Section 2 (1) (c) (xviii) of the Act. It is further been argued by the learned
counsel for the appellants-plaintiffs that General Conditions of Carriage
issued by the respondent-defendant clearly state that, „when you buy a ticket
to travel on a flight we operate, you enter into a contract of carriage with us‟,
and as such in view of the said admission that on buying a ticket to travel on
a flight, the buyer of the ticket enters into a contract of carriage, it cannot be
said that the dispute raised before the Court below was not a commercial
dispute.
13. Further submission on behalf of the appellants-plaintiffs is that the
respondent-defendant is registered with GST Department having a distinct
GST number and further that the respondent-defendant has been filing GST
returns and as such it cannot be said that the transaction between the
appellants-plaintiffs and the respondent-defendant is not a commercial
transaction, and therefore, any dispute arising out of such commercial
transaction has to be construed as commercial dispute.
14. Our attention has been drawn to a notification dated 28.06.2017
issued by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, under the relevant
provisions of the Central Goods and Services Act, 2017, whereby the
services of providing transport of passengers by air with or without complete
belongings in other than Economy Class have been held to be leviable for
GST. In this view, the submission is that once the respondent-defendant has
been paying GST for providing services of transport of passengers by air,
the dispute raised before the learned Court below cannot be said to be „not a
commercial dispute‟, and accordingly, the learned Court below has erred in
law.
15. Learned counsel representing the appellants-plaintiffs has also argued
that in terms of the provisions contained in Section 3 of the Carriage of Air
Act, 1972 read with Clauses 3(1) & 3(2) of Chapter II of the Schedule
appended to the said Act, once a passenger buys a ticket for air travel, a
contract of carriage comes into existence between the buyer of the ticket and
the service provider, and therefore, this contention of the respondent-
defendant that the dispute raised in the suit filed by the appellants-plaintiffs
did not constitute commercial dispute, is unfounded.
16. Referring to the definition of “contract of carriage” from the law
dictionary, it has been argued by the learned counsel representing the
appellants-plaintiffs that the contract of carriage is a binding contract, which
is demonstrated by any airway bill or lading bill or ticket of a passenger and
includes terms of transportation and the duties and privileges of the
transporter and a passenger as well. It is thus the submission on behalf of
the appellants-plaintiffs that on buying the ticket contract of carriage was
entered into between the parties and further that in terms of the provisions of
Section 2 (1) (c) (xviii) of the Act such contract provided a provision of
service hence the dispute raised by the appellants-plaintiffs will constitute a
commercial dispute within the meaning of the said term Section 2 (1) (c) of
the Act. Accordingly, the submission is that the learned Court has erred in
law in not appreciating the aforesaid aspects of the matter which vitiate the
order under appeal.
17. Learned counsel for the respondent-defendant on the other hand has
vehemently argued that the dispute raised by the appellants-plaintiffs cannot
be termed to be a commercial dispute within Section 2 (1) (c) of the Act, for
the reason that transaction between the parties is not a commercial
transaction, and therefore, any dispute arising of such transaction is not a
commercial dispute. It has also been argued that for constituting a dispute to
be a commercial dispute, there has to be some element of commerce and
business involved between the parties and in the instant case, no such
element of commerce or business was involved; rather, it was a simple
contract of providing service sans any commercial or business
consideration.
18. The following judgments have been relied upon by the learned
counsel for the respondents in support of her submissions:-
i.) Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. vs. K.S. Infraspace LLP and
Anr., (2020) 15 SCC 585
ii.) Meena Vohra vs. Master Hosts Pvt. Ltd. and Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine
Del 1758
iii.) Pushpshree Hospitals & Research Centre and Anr vs. Kothari
Chemist and Anr. 2024 SCC OnLine MP 9626
iv.) Bharat Huddanna Shetty vs. Ahuja Properties & Developers and
Ors., 2021 SCC OnLine Bom 13984
v.) Glasswood Realty Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. vs. Chandravilas Kailashkumar
Kothari 2021SCC OnLine Bom 5032
19. In Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. (supra) the jurisdiction of the
Commercial Courts has elaborately been discussed and it has been held that
the dispute which actually answer the “commercial dispute” as provided
under Section 2 (1) (c) of the Act are to be entertained by the Commercial
Courts and further that a strict construction to the provision of the
Commercial Courts Act is required otherwise any liberal interpretation shall
defeat the very objection and purpose of the said Act, i.e. speedy disposal of
the high value commercial disputes.
20. Taking note of this submission that strict interpretation in the case of
taxing institute will not be appropriate for interpreting the provisions of the
Commercial Courts Act, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Ambalal Sarabhai
Enterprises Ltd. (supra) has held that the very purpose for which the
Commercial Courts Act has been enacted will be defeated if every other suit
merely because it is filed before the Commercial Court is entertained. It is
for the reason that suits which are not actually related to commercial dispute,
but are being filed merely because of high value with intention of seeking
early disposal, would only clog the system and block the way for genuine
commercial dispute to be entertained by the Commercial Courts. Paragraphs
13 and 36 of the said judgment are extracted hereinbelow:-
“13. The learned Senior Advocate for the appellant would however,
contend that a strict interpretation as in the case of taxing statutes
would not be appropriate in the instant case where the issue relates to
jurisdiction. In that regard, the learned Senior Advocate has referred
to the Statement of Objects and Reasons with which the Commercial
Courts Act, 2015 is enacted so as to provide speedy disposal of high
value commercial disputes so as to create the positive image to the
investors world about the independent and responsive Indian legal
system. Hence, he contends that a purposive interpretation be made. It
is contended that a wider purport and meaning is to be assigned while
entertaining the suit and considering the dispute to be a commercial
dispute. Having taken note of the submission we feel that the very
purpose for which the CC Act of 2015 has been enacted would be
defeated if every other suit merely because it is filed before the
Commercial Court is entertained. This is for the reason that the suits
which are not actually relating to commercial dispute but being filed
merely because of the high value and with the intention of seeking
early disposal would only clog the system and block the way for the
genuine commercial disputes which may have to be entertained by the
Commercial Courts as intended by the lawmakers. In commercial
disputes as defined a special procedure is provided for a class of
litigation and a strict procedure will have to be followed to entertain
only that class of litigation in that jurisdiction. If the same is strictly
interpreted it is not as if those excluded will be non-suited without any
remedy. The excluded class of litigation will in any event be
entertained in the ordinary civil courts wherein the remedy has
always existed.
xxx xxx xxx
36. A perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Commercial Courts Act, 2015 and the various amendments to the
Civil Procedure Code and insertion of new rules to the Code
applicable to suits of commercial disputes show that it has been
enacted for the purpose of providing an early disposal of high value
commercial disputes. A purposive interpretation of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons and various amendments to the Civil Procedure
Code leaves no room for doubt that the provisions of the Act require
to be strictly construed. If the provisions are given a liberal
interpretation, the object behind constitution of Commercial Division
of Courts viz. putting the matter on fast track and speedy resolution of
commercial disputes, will be defeated. If we take a closer look at the
Statement of Objects and Reasons, words such as “early” and
“speedy” have been incorporated and reiterated. The object shall be
fulfilled only if the provisions of the Act are interpreted in a narrow
sense and not hampered by the usual procedural delays plaguing our
traditional legal system.”
21. A learned Single Judge of this Court in Meena Vohra (supra) has
held that a dispute to be categorized as „commercial dispute‟ the transaction
should be supported by a document that records, governs, or evidences
trade, commerce, or business activities, and further that absence of such a
document, raises doubt as to whether a dispute can be qualified as a
commercial dispute. The Court has further observed that a dispute shall
qualify as a commercial dispute when it arises from a transaction involving
merchants, bankers, financiers or traders and relates to mercantile
documents, including their enforcement and interpretation, etc. The Court
also states that the essence of a „commercial dispute‟ inherently carries a
commercial flavor, encompassing elements of trade and business. Para 31
of the said judgment is apposite to be quoted which reads as under:-
“31. Reference can be made to Black's Law Dictionary, 8th Edn.,
which defines “mercantile” as “an act relating to a merchant or
trading and being commercial in nature.” This interpretation
suggests that for a dispute to be categorised as a “commercial
dispute”, the transaction should be supported by a document that
records, governs, or evidences trade, commerce, or business activity.
The absence of such a document certainly raises doubts as to
whether a dispute can be classified as a “commercial dispute” under
the provisions of the Act of 2015. A dispute qualifies as a
“commercial dispute” when it arises from transactions involving
merchants, bankers, financiers, or traders, and relates to mercantile
documents, including their enforcement and interpretation.
Pertinently, the essence of a “commercial dispute” inherently carries
a commercial flavour, encompassing elements of trade and
business.”
22. The High Court of Bombay in Bharat Huddanna Shetty (supra) after
discussing the definition of the term „commercial dispute‟ occurring Section
2 (1) (c) of the Act and further taking into account the law laid down by the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd.(supra) has
held that to constitute a dispute as commercial dispute, the transaction has to
be ordinary transaction of merchants, bankers, financiers and traders such as
those relating to mercantile documents including enforcement and
interpretation of such documents etc. In the light of the discussions made in
this judgment, the Bombay High Court held that if a friendly loan was lent
to another needy friend, the same would not amount to a transaction between
them in the course of their ordinary business.
23. In Glasswood Realty Pvt. Ltd. (supra), the Bombay High Court has
held that dispute which are in nature of ordinary transaction of merchants,
bankers, financiers and traders will fall within the purview of „commercial
dispute‟, and it shall cover the ordinary/normal transaction carried out by the
entities mentioned in Section 2 (1) (c) (i) of the Act such transaction will
also include buying, selling or trading goods, etc. Any such transaction by
financiers will also be included in the commercial disputes. Discussing
Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. (supra) it was held by the Court that
transaction of advancing an amount as a friendly loan cannot be termed to be
commercial in nature and accordingly any such dispute arising out of any
such transaction will not be covered within the meaning of term
„commercial dispute‟ as per Section 2 (1) (c) of the Act.
24. It is trite law that prayer for return of plaint or rejection of plaint
moved under Order VII Rule 10 or Rule 11 respectively has to be considered
only on the basis of the averments made in the plaint and if we examine the
plaint assertions in the instant case, what we find is the dispute sought to be
raised by the appellants-plaintiffs with the respondent-defendant does not
qualify to be „commercial dispute‟ within the meaning of the said term
occurring in Section 2 (1) (c) of the Act.
25. It is not in dispute that once the appellants-plaintiffs bought the air
ticket a contract was entered into, however merely because the said contract
came into existence it cannot be said that any commercial transaction took
place between the parties. The contract only provides that on buying the
ticket the respondent-defendant will be obligated to take the passenger to
his-her destination. Such transaction, in our opinion, sans any element of
business, trade or commerce, cannot be termed to be ordinary transaction of
merchants or bankers or financiers or traders, it can also not be termed to be
export or import of mercantile or services.
26. In fact, the dispute which occurred between the parties in this case
cannot be said to be a dispute arising out of any of the transactions
mentioned in various sub-clause of Section 2 (1) (c) of the Act. Reliance
placed by learned counsel for the appellants-plaintiffs on Section 2 (1) (c)
(xviii) of the Act is highly misplaced. Section 2 (1) (c) (xviii) reads as
under:-
“2. Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,––
a. ***
b.***
(c) “commercial dispute” means a dispute arising out of––
(i) to (xvii) ***
(xviii) agreements for sale of goods or provision of services;”
27. The aforequoted provision of Section 2 (1) (c) (xviii) provides that
any dispute arising out of agreement for sale of goods or arising out of
agreement for provision of services will constitute commercial dispute. In
the instant case there is no agreement for sale of goods; it is only a contract
for providing services, however dispute arising out of such a contract for
providing services can be construed to be a commercial dispute only in case
it involves some or the other kind of trade or business or financing etc.
28. An agreement containing a provision for providing mere services on
payment of certain charges cannot, in every case, be termed to be an
agreement, dispute in respect of which can be said to be a commercial
dispute. To constitute a dispute to be a commercial dispute arising out of an
agreement which contains a provision of services, the agreement or
transaction is to necessarily contain an element of commerce or trade or
business.
29. For the reasons aforesaid, we are of the considered opinion that the
dispute raised in the instant case by the appellants-plaintiffs instituting the
suit cannot be said to be commercial dispute as it did not arise out of the
transaction or agreement involving some element of trade or business or
financing or commercial etc.
30. As has been held in Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd.(supra) by
Hon‟ble Supreme Court, Commercial Courts Act has been enacted for a
specific purpose of creating judicial forum to provide for speedy disposal of
high value commercial dispute. The crucial aspect, thus, for instituting a
suit under the Commercial Courts Act is commercial or business or trading
activity and any suit of high valuation minus these elements cannot be
instituted in the Commercial Courts Act.
31. We thus do not find any error or illegality in the order passed by the
learned Commercial Court so as to call for any interference in this appeal.
32. Resultantly, the appeal fails, which is hereby dismissed.
33. No orders as to costs.