COURT: HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: CS(COMM) 206/2019
DATE: 26.08.2025
PLAINTIFF: Aircel Limited & Ors.
DEFENDENT: Bharti Airtel Limited & Anr.
JUDGE: Hon’ble Ms. Justice Jyoti Singh

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This application is filed on behalf of the Plaintiffs under Order XXIII
Rule 1 CPC read with Section 14(3) of the Limitation Act, 1963 for
permission to withdraw the suit and seeking leave to file fresh proceedings
before the appropriate forum, on the same cause of action as also for a
direction to exclude the time period from 15.04.2019 i.e. the date of
institution of this suit till the disposal of the present application, for purpose
of calculating limitation period to approach the appropriate forum.
2. To decide this application, a short backdrop is necessary. Suit was
instituted by the Plaintiffs inter alia for a decree against the Defendants
towards costs incurred and/or loss suffered by the Plaintiffs on account of
breach of contractual obligations by the Defendants in relation to Spectrum
Trading Agreements etc. Plaintiffs are telecom service providers.This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
3. It is stated in the application that Plaintiffs and Defendants are
licensees as defined under Section 2(1)(e) of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997 (TRAI Act) read with Section 4 of Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885 with licences to establish, maintain and operate
telegraphs across India and thus qualify as service providers by virtue of
Section 2(1)(j) of the TRAI Act. Present dispute arises out of Defendants’
alleged failure to take over active infrastructure equipment from the
Plaintiffs in terms of the Term Sheet for the specified consideration, as part
of composite spectrum trading deal. Bonafidely believing that this Court was
the appropriate forum, the present suit was filed in 2019.
4. It is further averred that at the time of instituting the suit, Plaintiffs
were subject to insolvency proceedings under Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016 (‘IBC’) before NCLT, Mumbai. By orders dated 12.03.2018 and
19.03.2018, insolvency proceedings were commenced against the Plaintiffs
under Section 10 of IBC due to inability of the Plaintiffs to pay off their
debts. While the suit was at the stage of decision on the exemption
application filed by the Plaintiffs to sue as an indigent person, Defendants
filed an application being I.A. 1303/2021 under Order VII Rule 11(a) and
(d) CPC for rejection of the plaint inter alia on the ground that this Court
does not have jurisdiction to entertain the suit. It was stated in the
application that only TDSAT has the jurisdiction to deal with disputes
between two or more service providers. It is in light of this application
raising objection to the jurisdiction of this Court that present application has
been filed for withdrawal.
5. Mr. Salman Khurshid, learned Senior counsel appearing for the
Plaintiffs submits that when the suit was instituted, it was under the beliefThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
that this Court has jurisdiction to adjudicate the disputes, however, upon due
diligence and legal advice, Plaintiffs have realized that the appropriate
forum for raising the disputes is TDSAT inasmuch as under Section 14(a)(ii)
of TRAI Act, TDSAT is conferred with exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate
any dispute between two or more service providers. It is urged that
Defendants cannot raise any objection to the present application since they
have themselves sought rejection of the plaint on the ground that this Court
lacks jurisdiction and moreover, under Order XXIII Rule 1(1) CPC,
Plaintiffs have the right to seek permission to withdraw the suit with leave to
initiate fresh proceedings before the appropriate forum. Reliance is placed in
this regard on the judgment of the Madras High Court in K.P. Selvah v.
Atlee, C.R.P. (NPD) No.3331/2019, passed on 22.10.2019.
6. Learned counsel for the Defendants opposes the application on the
ground that present suit was initially instituted as a commercial suit but with
malafide intent, an application was filed subsequently to sue as an indigent
and once again, Plaintiffs take a different stand and seek to withdraw the suit
to approach TDSAT. Plaintiffs ought to have exercised due diligence and
take a legal advice before instituting the suit as it is clear from reading of
Section 14(a)(ii) of TRAI Act that TDSAT has the exclusive jurisdiction to
adjudicate disputes between two or more service providers. In this backdrop,
it is urged that Court should not exercise discretion in favour of the Plaintiffs
permitting them to withdraw with leave to institute fresh proceedings before
TDSAT.
7. Heard learned Senior Counsel for the Plaintiffs and learned counsel
for the Defendants.
8. Order XXIII Rule 1(1) CPC provides that at any time after, theThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
institution of the suit, Plaintiff may as against all or any of the Defendants
abandon his suit or a part of his claim. Rule (3) provides that where the
Court is satisfied that the suit must fail by reason of some formal defect or
there are sufficient grounds for allowing the Plaintiff to institute a fresh suit
for the subject matter of a suit or part of a claim, it may, on such terms as it
thinks fit, grant the Plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or such
part of the claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit. It is a common ground
between the parties that the disputes raised by the Plaintiffs in the present
suit can only be adjudicated by TDSAT by virtue of Section 14(a)(ii) of
TRAI Act since TDSAT has the exclusive jurisdiction to adjudicate any
dispute between two or more service providers. Therefore, admittedly, this
Court lacks the jurisdiction to entertain the present suit and conscious of
this, Defendants filed an application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC.
9. In my view, there is no impediment in the Plaintiffs withdrawing this
suit and taking recourse to filing fresh suit before TDSAT. Argument of the
Defendants that Plaintiffs have been shifting stands by first filing a
commercial suit and then seeking permission to sue an indigent or now
seeking to withdraw the suit, cannot come in the way of the Plaintiffs
withdrawing this suit when admittedly the disputes are amenable to the
jurisdiction of TDSAT.
10. Accordingly, this application is allowed to the extent of permitting the
Plaintiffs to withdraw the suit with leave to file fresh proceedings before the
appropriate forum.
11. Application stands disposed of.
CS(COMM) 206/2019, I.A. 12933/2019 & I.A. 1303/2021
12. The suit is disposed of as withdrawn with leave to the Plaintiffs toThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
institute fresh proceedings on the same cause of action before the
appropriate forum. Insofar as the prayer for excluding the time period from
date of filing of this suit till disposal of this application for purpose of
computing the application in approaching the appropriate forum is
concerned, this decision is left to the appropriate forum.
13. It is made clear that this Court has not expressed any opinion either on
the merits of the disputes or on exclusion of limitation period under Section
14 of the Limitation Act, 1963.
14. All pending applications stand disposed of.
JYOTI SINGH, J
AUGUST 26, 2025
Ch/SSThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 02/09/2025 at 12:30:54