COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: RFA(COMM) 35/2023
DATE: 07th JULY, 2025
PLAINTIFF: SKY CABLE INDUSTRIES & ANR. 
DEFENDANT: M/S KKM OVERSEAS PRIVATE LTD.
JUDGE: Justice SUBRAMONIUM PRASAD & Justice HARISH VAIDYANATHAN SHANKAR

----JUDGMENT-----

The present appeal under Section 13 of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015
has been preferred for setting aside the Impugned Judgment dated
13.10.2022 passed by the Ld. District Judge (Commercial Courts), South
East District, Saket Courts, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as "Trial
Court") in CS (COMM) No.28/2020.
2. The Appellant No 1 (original Defendant No. 1) is a partnership firm
engaged in the sale of electronic goods such as mobile phones and tablets,
and Appellant No. 2 (original Defendant No. 2), is a partner in the said
firm.
3. The Respondent (original Plaintiff) is engaged in the business of
providing freight forwarding services through air, sea and land, customs
clearance and warehousing etc.
4. Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts leading to the filing of the instant
Appeal are as under:-
a. The Appellants and Respondent were engaged in business with
each other for several years. Appellant No.1 used to place orders
through its partner i.e. Appellant No. 2 for freight forwarding
services of the Respondent for delivery of cargo from various
foreign countries to India. Payment for these services used to be
made from time to time.
b. The said service was availed by the Appellants in April 2019 for
the purpose of consigning electronic items from Hong Kong to IGI
Airport, Delhi. Three invoices were raised for this service by the
Respondent. The details of those invoices are as follows:
i. Invoice No.DELAI1920GST0022 (hereinafter referred
to as “Invoice No.22”) dated 29.04.2019 for Rs.1,60,798/-
ii. Invoice No. DELAI1920GST0023 (hereinafter referred
to as “Invoice No.23”) dated 29.04.2019 for Rs.3,30,965/-
iii. Invoice No. DELAI1920GST0048 (hereinafter referred
to as “Invoice No.48”) dated 11.06.2019 for Rs.80,094/-
The total outstanding amount claimed was Rs.5,71,857/-.
c. As per the Respondent, the Appellant failed to make payments
against these invoices in spite of repeated reminders. However, as
per the Appellants, the goods were not delivered on time by the
Respondent and as a result the Appellants suffered financial set
back and issued two debit notes against Invoice No.22 and Invoice
No.23.
d. With respect to Invoice No.48 the Appellants, have averred that in
spite of their willingness to pay the outstanding amount the
Respondent never collected the cheque and no interest whatsoever
is payable on the same.
e. Thereafter the Respondent herein, filed a Commercial Suit bearing
No. CS(Comm) 28/2020 before the Trial Court praying for a decree
of Rs.6,23,324/- i.e. amount due for the three invoices along with
Rs.51,467/- towards interest which was calculated at the rate of 18
% from 11.06.2019 until filing of the suit along with pendente lite
interest.
f. The relevant portion of the written statement is being reproduced as
under:
“1. That the Plaintiff putting his evil mind to work, has
manipulated the facts of the case with ill intent to
harass the Defendants and malign the reputation and
goodwill of the Defendants in the market. The correct
facts of the case are:
a. That the Defendants is a partnership firm, which has
a well-established manufacturing unit, dealing
primarily in electronic products such as Mobiles,
Tablets etc. and it is having a strong and stable name
in the electronic industry over the world.
b.That the Defendants placed the order to the Plaintiff
for providing the freight services on the basis of the
goodwill of the Plaintiff in the market. The Plaintiff,
even after the promises and assurances to deliver the
goods on time, miserably failed to deliver the goods in
the prescribed frame of time, as was agreed and
promised, due to which the Defendants suffered not
only the financial losses but also irreparable losses
and injuries to the goodwill as well as to the reputation
of the Defendants in the market as further
clients/customers of the Defendants cancelled the order
due to the delay and has also denied to place any
further order of the goods to the Defendants. One of
Defendants' client had issued the debit note to
Defendants on account of failure to supply goods
timely, which was on account of the failure on the part
of the Plaintiff to deliver goods on time.
c. It is pertinent to mention here that due to
insufficiency in the services rendered by the Plaintiff to
the Defendants, the Defendants have duly issued the
Debit Note vide no.1 of the amount Rs.3,30,965/- dated
14.05.2019, and Debit Note vide no. 2 of the amount
Rs. 1,60,798/- dated 14.05.2019 against the Tax
Invoices raised by the Plaintiff for the services vide ref
no. DELAI1920GST0023 and vide ref no.
DELAI1920GST0022 dated 29.04.2019, which was
very well within the knowledge of the Plaintiff and is
even apparent from the mail dated 15.10.2019,
exchanged between the employees of Plaintiff and
Defendants. Hence, there is no liability of the
Defendants to pay towards the abovementioned
Invoices to the Plaintiff. This act of the Plaintiff only
depicts the malafide intent of Plaintiff to extract money
from the Defendants without any rhyme and reason.
d. That the Defendants, herein admit to make payment
against the Invoice No. DELAI1920GST0048, dated
11.06.2019 amounting Rs.80,094/- raised by the
Plaintiff, about which the Defendants duly intimated
the Plaintiff and requested the Plaintiff to collect the
cheque of Rs.80,000/- from the office of the
Defendants, which was kept ready by the Defendants
long back. It is further evident from various occasions
and communications between the employees of the
Plaintiff and Defendants that the Defendants were
willing to make payment for the Invoice
No.DELAI1920GST0048 on time. However, for the
reasons best known to the Plaintiff, inspite of collecting
the cheque, the Plaintiff with malafide intent filed the
present frivolous suit to harass the Defendants and to
grab the interest from the Defendants. Hence, the
Defendants are not liable to pay any interest
whatsoever.
e. However, despite the above categorical
understanding and terms agreed between the parties
regarding the Invoices and the Debit Notes, the
Plaintiff with ill and malicious intent filed the present
suit to illegally grab the amount and the interest from
the Defendants, which the Defendants are not even
liable to pay.
f. Moreso, with the ill intent to harass the Defendants
and to cheat the Defendants, the Plaintiff fraudulently
provided manipulated and forged Airway Bill vide
no.77545187995, which was serviced vide Service
Order Nos. TW190426 & TW190428. The bare perusal
of both the Service Orders, it can be clearly seen that
in first Service Order vide No. TWI190426, it was
mentioned that the total number of boxes were 242
with gross weight of 2536 kg and in the other Service
Order vide No.TI190428 the total number of boxes
were 84 with gross weight of 1198 kg, whereas, the
actual number of packages were 151 & 175
respectively, which only came into the knowledge of
the Defendants after they tracked the shipment on the
custom site „ICEGATE‟. Hence, it is very well evident
from this act of the Plaintiff that the Plaintiff not only
wanted to harass the Defendants but also had an
intention to surreptitiously make monetary benefits out
of the Defendants by playing fraud on them.
PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS:
1. That the present suit as filed by the Plaintiff against
the Defendants, is not maintainable against the
Defendants before this Hon'ble Court and liable to be
returned to be presented to another court having
competent jurisdiction; as Defendant No. 1 herein is a
Partnership firm, having its registered office at Village
Moginand, Tehsil Nahan, District Sirmour, Himachal
Pradesh-173030 and neither the Defendant is situated
within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court nor any
alleged cause of action arose within the jurisdiction of
this Hon'ble Court.
2. That the present suit for recovery of Rs.6,23,324/-
arises out of malafide motive to coerce the Defendants
in satisfying some baseless, frivolous and fictitious
claims made by the Plaintiff Company against the
Defendants. The Plaintiff is guilty of SuperessoVari
and SuggetioFalsi and has suppressed & concealed
very material facts with regard thereto from this
Hon'ble Court with malafide motives.
3. That the Plaintiff has not only fraudulently filed the
suit against the Defendants but has also played fraud
with this Hon'ble Court by misrepresenting and
misleading this Hon ble Court by averring about the
other two different firms i.e., Alpha Radios and Neo
Enterprises, which do not even pertains to the present
suit. Hence, the Plaintiff is just mixing and merging
facts to take some benefit out of the Defendants, which
is not legally permitted at all.
4. That the present suit as filed by the Plaintiff
Company against the Defendants is liable to be
rejected/dismissed under the provisions of Order VII
Rule 11 CPC, 1908 inasmuch as there exist no cause of
action in favour of the Plaintiff and against the
Defendants.
5. It is submitted that the frivolous claim has been
raised by the Plaintiff in his Plaint against the
Defendants which is complete moonshine and nothing
but an attempt to mislead, misguide and play fraud
upon this Hon'ble Court as no averments raised by the
Plaintiff.
6. That the present suit is nothing but a blatant abuse
and misuse of judicial process, just to harass
defendants by dragging him before this Hon'ble court
and also to tarnish the Image of the defendants. Thus,
the present suit of the Plaintiff is bad in law and is
thus, is liable to be dismissed with exemplary costs.
REPLY ON MERITS
1. That the contents of Para no.1 of the Plaint are
denied for want of knowledge.
2. That the contents of Para no.2 of the Plaint are
denied for want of knowledge. The Plaintiff is put to
strict proof of the same.
3. That the contents of Para no.3 of the Plaint are a
matter of record and need no reply.
4. That the contents of Para no.4 of the Plaint are a
matter of record and need no reply.
5. That the contents of Para no.5 of the Plaint are a
matter of record and need no reply.
6. That the contents of Para no.6 of the Plaint are a
matter of record and need no reply. However, only on
the basis of the false promises and assurances given by
the Plaintiff that the goods will be supplied to the
Defendants within the usual frame of time after the
despatch by the respective vendor from the respective
country, the Defendants used to place order with the
Plaintiff for providing services of forwarder. Moreso,
this is an admitted fact that the Defendants used to
make all the payments on time for the services
rendered by the Plaintiff. The contents of preliminary
objections/ submissions may be read as reply to Para
under reply.
7. That the contents of Para no.7 of the Plaint are
admitted to the extent that the Defendant have been
making payments to the Plaintiff firm from time to
time. The contents of preliminary objections/
submissions may be read as reply to Para under reply.
8.
8. That the contents of Para no, 8 of the Plaint are a
matter of record and need no reply.
9. That the contents of Para no. 9 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is denied that as on
11.06.2019 an amount of Rs.5,71,857/- exclusive of
interest, is due or outstanding against the Tax Invoices
raised by the Plaintiff firm to the Defendants. It is
submitted that due to insufficiency in the services
rendered by the Plaintiff to the Defendants, the
Defendants have duly issued the Debit Note vide no. 1
of the amount Rs. 3,30,965/- dated 14.05.2019 and
Debit Note vide no. 2 of the amount Rs. 1,60,798/-
dated 14.05.2019 against the Tax Invoices raised by
the Plaintiff for the services vide ref no.
DELAI1920GST0023 and vide ref no.
DELAI1920GST0022 dated 29.04.2019, which clearly
shows that as on 11.06.2019 it was within the
knowledge of the Plaintiff that the Defendants are not
liable to pay for the abovesaid Invoices. The contents
of preliminary objections/submissions may be read as
reply to Para under reply.
10. That the contents of Para no.10 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied for want of knowledge.
The Plaintiff is put to strict proof of the same. The
contents of preliminary objections/ submissions may be
read as reply to Para under reply.
11. That the contents of Para no. 11 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied for want of knowledge.
The Plaintiff is put to strict proof of the same. The
contents of preliminary objections/ submissions may be
read as reply to Para under reply.
12. That the contents of Para no. 12 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is denied that the
Tax Invoice bearing No. DELA1920GST0048 for Rs.
80,094/- dated 11.06.2019 with MAWB No.
77545187995 and HAWB Nos. TW190426 was issued/
provided to Defendants as Plaintiff received the Debit
Note from the agent late and because of the agents
mistake they printed wrong weight on the HAWB, It is
further denied that alongwith the Tax Invoice Plaintiff
provided Airline MAWB and Manifest which clearly
proved the Chargeable weight difference. It is
submitted that the Plaintiff has fraudulently taken a
false contention to cover up their lacunas and
lacklustre attitude in providing the services. The bare
perusal of the mail dated 12.06.2019 reveals that the
Defendants has duly investigated the documents and
checked the weight which was correct and no
difference, whatsoever was found by the Defendant in
the weight. Infact, it is evident from the mail dated
12.06.2019 that the Plaintiff has concocted a web by
raising a wrong issue that too after a month of the
transaction took place, just with the malafide intent to
extort the money from the Defendants. Moreso, the ill
intent to not only harass the Defendants but also, make
monetary, benefits out of the Defendants, the Plaintiff
fraudulently provided manipulated and forged Airway
Bill vide no. 77545187995, which was serviced vide
Service Order Nos. TW190426 & TW190428 to the
Defendants. The bare perusal of both the Service
Orders, it can be clearly seen that in first Service
Order vide No. TWI190426, it was mentioned that the
total number of boxes were 242, with gross weight of
2536 kg and in the other Service Order vide No.
TI190428 the total number of boxes were 84 with gross
weight of 1198 kg, whereas, the actual number of
packages were 151 175 respectively, which only came,
into the knowledge of the Defendants after they tracked
the shipment on the custom site 'ICEGATE'. The
Defendant calls upon the Plaintiff to prove to the hilt
the averments as are contained in Para No. 12 of the
Plaint. The contents of preliminary objections/
submissions may be read as reply to Para under reply.
13. That the contents of Para no. 13 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is vehemently denied
that the services provided by the Plaintiff to the
Defendants were to the utmost satisfaction. The
Defendant calls upon the Plaintiff to prove to the hilt
the averments as are contained in Para No. 13 of the
Plaint. The contents of preliminary abjections/
submissions may be read as reply to Para under reply.
14. That the contents of Para no. 14 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is denied that inspite
of various written requests, demand and reminders
made by the Plaintiff to the Defendants, the Defendants
have failed and neglected to make the payment. The
Defendant calls upon the Plaintiff to prove to the hilt
the averments as are contained in Para No. 14 of the
Plaint. The contents of preliminary objections/
submissions may be read as reply to Para under reply.
15. That the contents of Para no. 15 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is denied that the
Defendants failed to make payment of the aforesaid
amount to the Plaintiff. It is submitted that the
Defendants has no liability to pay any amount except
Rs.80,000/- against the Invoice No.DELAI19200048
and nor has any liability to pay any kind of interest as
alleged. The Defendant calls upon the Plaintiff to
prove to the hilt the averments as are contained in
Para No. 15 of the Plaint. The contents of preliminary
objections/ submissions may be read as reply to Para
under reply.
16. That the contents of Para no. 16 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is denied that, the
aforesaid emails were duly served upon the Defendants
but inspite of that the Defendants has not complied
with the same. It is an admitted fact that the emails
were exchanged between the Plaintiff and Defendants
but the Defendant out rightly denies and disputes the
content of the emails and as such the Plaintiff is called
upon to strictly prove the contents of the emails. It is
further submitted that the Plaintiff has concocted a web
by raising frivolous averments even after being well
acquainted with the facts and circumstances as there
was nothing in the emails to which the Defendants
should have complied with in view of the objections
and issuance of debit notes. The contents of
preliminary objections/ submissions may be read as
reply to Para under reply.
17. That the contents of Para no. 17 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is submitted that the
Plaintiff is trying to misrepresent this Hon'ble Court by
averring about the other two different firms i.e., Alpha
Radios and Neo Enterprises, which do not even
concerns to the present suit. This averment is nothing
but is merely an attempt to mislead, misguide and play
fraud upon this Hon'ble Court. The Defendant calls
upon the Plaintiff to prove to the hilt the averments as
are contained in Para No. 17 of the Plaint. The
contents of preliminary objections/ submissions may be
read as reply to Para under reply.
18, That the contents of Para no. 18 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is vehemently denied
that the Defendants are liable to pay interest @18%
p.a. as per. agreed terms between the parties and is
otherwise also the prevailing rate of interest in similar
commercial transactions. It is further denied that the
Defendants are liable to pay to Plaintiff the total of
Rs.6,23,324/-. The said... amount is not legally due and
or payable to the Plaintiff from the Defendants as
claimed or otherwise. It is submitted that since services
provided by the Plaintiff was not within time which is
the breach of contractually agreed terms, thus the
Defendants is not liable to pay any amount to the
Plaintiff let alone the interest amount. As mentioned
above, the Defendants was unable to take the fruits of
the services rendered by the Plaintiff, which lead to not
only financial losses and damages but also loss of
repute and inability to complete order within
prescribed time. Therefore, it is submitted that the
captioned suit has been filed as an afterthought to
cover up for their own breach and as a way to harass
and force the Defendants to make payment for the
services which clearly did not meet the agreed terms.
Hence, the Defendants are not liable to pay any
interest whatsoever. The Defendant calls upon the
Plaintiff to prove to the hilt the averments as are
contained in Para No. 18 of the Plaint. The contents of
preliminary objections/ submissions may be read as
reply to Para under reply.
19. That the contents of Para no. 19 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is submitted that no
cause of action has arisen in favour of the Plaintiff and
against the Defendant which warrants the Interference
of court of law and hence the plaint is vexatious,
malafide and made in error of law. Under these
circumstances, the suit is liable to be rejected. As such
provisions of Order VII Rule 11 CPC are applicable,
for the reason that no cause of action has ever arisen
against the Defendants. The contents of preliminary
objections/ submissions may be read as reply to Para
under reply.
20. That the contents of Para no. 20 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. The Defendant calls
upon the Plaintiff to prove to the hilt the averments as
are contained in Para No. 20 of the Plaint. The
contents of preliminary objections/ submissions may be
read as reply to Para under reply.
21. That the contents of Para no. 21 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. The Defendant calls
upon the Plaintiff to prove to the hilt the averments as
are contained in Para No. 21 of the Plaint. The
contents of preliminary objections/ submissions may be
read as reply to Para under reply.
22. That the contents of Para no. 22 of the Plaint are
absolutely wrong and incorrect; being baseless and
frivolous and are hence denied. It is denied that the
present suit is filed within the period of limitation as
prescribed by law. The Defendant calls upon the
Plaintiff to prove to the hilt the averments as are
contained in Para No. 22 of the Plaint. The contents
of: preliminary objections/ submissions may be read as
reply to Para under reply.”
g. Upon completion of pleadings the Respondent, filed an application
under Order XII Rule 6 Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (hereinafter
referred to as the “the Code”). The Trial Court while disposing off
the said application held as under:
"7. Following admissions have been made in
preliminary submissions and para nos. 9 and 12 of
reply on merits in written statement:
(1 )The plaintiff is in the business of providing Freight
Forwarding Services.
(2) The defendants deal primarily in electronic items
such as mobile phones and tablets.
(3) The defendants used to place orders to the plaintiff
for providing Freight Services from off shore to IGI
Airport, Delhi.
(4) For the freight services provided to the defendants
from Hongkong to IGI Airport, the plaintiff had raised
invoice no. 0023 dated 29.04.2019 of Rs. 3,30,965/-
and invoice no. 0022, dated 29.04.2019 of Rs.
1,60,798/-. But the plaintiff had committed following
discrepancies:
(I) The plaintiff did not transport goods on time due to
which the defendants suffered not only the financial
loss but injury to reputation also. Some customers
cancelled their orders due to delay and refused to
place further orders in future. One of its client had
issued a debit note to the defendant due to non-supply
of goods on time. Due to that reason, the defendant
had raised a debit note no. 1 of Rs. 3,30,965/- against
invoice no. 0023 and debit note o. 2 of Rs. 1,60,798/-
against invoice no. 0022. (II)The plaintiff forged
Airway bill no. 77545187995 and service orders nos.
TW190426 and TW190428 by mentioning the number
of boxes to be transported to the defendants as 242 and
84. But when the defendants checked the custom site
“ICEGATE”, it came to know that the number of boxes
were 151 and 175 respectively.
(5) The defendants were liable to pay Rs. 80,094/- in
respect of invoice no. 0048 dated 11.06.2019 and
hence, a cheque of Rs. 80,000/- was given to the
plaintiff.
8. The document Annexure 7 appearing at page no. 19
has been described by the plaintiff as Master Airway
Bill (MAWB) and its no. is 77545187995. Vide that
consignment note, 326 boxes of the gross weight of
3734 were consigned from Hongkong to IGI Airport in
the container of Spice Jet and the plane flew on
21.04.2019.
The above MAWB was serviced through two notes
Annexures 8 and 9 appearing at page no. 20 and 21.
Those documents bearing nos. TW 190428 and TW
190426 have been described by the plaintiff as Home
Airway Bill (HAWB). The numbers of boxes written in
Annexure 8 and 9 are 84 and 246. The gross weights of
the 1198 and 2536 kgs respectively have also been
mentioned therein. The total of boxes mentioned in
Annexure 8 and 9 make 326 and total of the gross
weight also make 3734 Kgs. The number of boxes and
their weight correspond to the number and weight as
mentioned in MAWB. It means that in all, the plaintiff
was to transport 326 boxes of the weight of 3734 Kgs
to the defendants and it transported those goods in two
consignments on the same day.
9. The defendants did not suffer any prejudice in
transportation of their goods in two lots instead of one
because they did not suffer any loss by that act of the
plaintiff. Moreover, in order to show that as per the
tracking report appearing on “ICEGATE”, the
consignments were containing 151 and 176 boxes, the
defendant did not file tracking report. Even if it is
presumed that the tracking report is to that effect it
would not make any difference because the total of
those boxes as per that report, make 326 and it is the
same number which the plaintiff had undertaken to
transport to Delhi.
10. The second discrepancy pointed out by the
defendants is that the goods were not transported well
in time due to which they suffered loss as their
customers cancelled their orders and one of the
customers raised a debit note.
The defendants did not place on record any document
to show that time was the essence in contract with the
plaintiff for transporting their goods from Hongkong to
Delhi. It is pertinent to mention that as per MAWB and
I IAWB, the container was to come to Delhi on
21.04.2019. The consignment included the mobile
phones and laptop etc. As per the mail dated
18.10.2019 sent by the plaintiff to defendants,
appearing at page no. 31, it was intimated to the
defendants that the flight was to leave Hongkong on
21.04.2019. It left on time and the DO was handed
over to the defendants on 23.04.2019. It is further
mentioned that there was no agreement between them
that shipment was to arrive at Delhi Airport exactly on
time. It is next mentioned that there was a delay of one
week in shipment but that delay was attributable to the
shippers of the defendants because despite its best
effort, the plaintiff could not reach to the shippers for
almost a week as there was no response from them.
In order to show that some of its customers had
cancelled their orders due to late arrival of the
consignment, the defendants did not place on file the
copy of orders of those customers. The names of such
customers have also not been mentioned. They did not
place on file the consignment note raised against
defendants by one of their customer due to late arrival
of the consignment. So, the defense taken by the
defendants is completely moonshine and cannot be
taken into account because even if the case is allowed
to go to the stage of trial, that would not make any
difference.
11. During arguments, learned counsel for defendants
admitted that though the cheque of Rs. 80,000/- was
given to the plaintiff regarding invoice no. 0048 dated
11.06.2019 but the same has not been encashed. So,
the plaintiff is entitled to that amount also from the
defendants.
12. In view of above discussion, the application u/o XII
Rule 6 CPC is allowed. It is held that the plaintiff is
entitled to an amount of Rs. 1,60,798/- + Rs. 3,30,965/-
+ Rs. 80,094/= Rs. 5,71,857/- from defendant no. 1. It
is mentioned in Clause no. 5 of the invoices that
interest @ 18 % p.a shall be payable if the payment
was made beyond 15 days of the invoice. The
transactions between the parties were commercial in
nature. So, the plaintiff is entitled to interest on
principal @ 18 % p.a from the date of last invoice i.e.
from 11.06.2019 till the realization thereof. The
plaintiff is entitled to cost also. "
h. The Respondent herein was awarded a sum of RS. 5,71,857/- by the
Trial Court vide the impugned judgement.
i. Aggrieved by the said judgment, the Appellants have preferred the
present appeal.
5. It has been submitted on behalf of the learned Counsel for the Appellants
that the impugned judgement passed by the Trial Court under Order XII Rule 6
is unsustainable in law. The Ld. Counsel for the Appellants contends that there
is no clear admission made by the appellants in their written statement, filed
before the Trial Court. On the contrary he contends that the Trial Court has
failed to appreciate multiple disputed averments which go to the root of the
matter and there was a fundamental error on the part of the Trial Court to treat
them as admissions.
6. The learned Counsel for the Appellants further contends by pointing out
that the Appellants had categorically denied their liability for Invoice No.22
amounting to Rs.1,60,798/- and Invoice No.23 amounting to Rs.3,30,965/-
before the Trial Court. The learned Counsel for the appellant further submits
that as far as Invoice No.48 is concerned the Appellants have already handed
over a cheque of Rs.80,000/- to the Respondents and the decretal amount has
been passed on the basis of a conditional and qualified statement and the same
would be in the teeth of Order XII Rule 6 of the Code.
7. Additionally, the learned Counsel for the Appellant submits that a
number of averments had been raised before the Trial Court. These averments
pertained to the issues such as the liability of the Respondent for not delivering
the consignment on time, allegations regarding the forging of airway bill by the
Respondent and these issues are substantial in nature and it was imperative that
these issues be dealt with and undertaken at the stage of the trial. Therefore,
this was not a case fit for the exercise of discretion under Order XII Rule 6 by
the Trial Court and a perusal of the pleadings would indicate that the
Appellants have conditionally admitted to only a part of the payment and
categorically and consistently denied any other liability.
8. Per contra, the learned Counsel for the Respondent has argued that the
admissions of the Appellants in their written statement filed before the Trial
Court is clear, categorical and unambiguous and therefore the admissions are
sufficient to pass a decree on the basis of Order 12 Rule 6 of the Code. He
asserts that the Appellants have made categorical admissions in the pleadings
with respect to payment of Invoice No.48. He also contends that the Appellants
have also acknowledged that goods were transported by the Respondent. The
learned Counsel for the Respondents has also argued that the Trial Court has
noted that the Appellant has admitted that the total number of boxes received
by them vide two separate consignments was 151 and 175. This adds up to
about 326 boxes and the same corroborates with the details in the
Respondent’s Master and House Airway Bills and thereby undermined the
defence of the Appellant. Furthermore, the Trial Court has held that the
Appellant has been unable to raise any substantial defence regarding the issue
of delay by the Respondent in the delivery of goods and how such a delay
caused any loss in business. Therefore, in view of these categorical findings
taken in tandem with the clear and categorical admission of the Appellants
with respect to their liability for payment of amount claimed by the
Respondent in Invoice No.48, the Appellants admitted their liability towards
the entire decretal amount and the impugned judgement of the Trial Court
warrants no interference.
9. Heard learned Counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
10. The principal question which emerges for the consideration of this Court
is whether the Trial Court has exercised its discretion in a manner as mandated
by the language of Order XII Rule 6, while passing the impugned judgement.
An ancillary question which needs to be dealt with before answering the main
question is whether there was an unequivocal, clear and categorical admission
by the Appellants. It is the contention of the learned Counsel for the
Respondent that the admission on behalf of the Appellants with respect to their
liability towards the third invoice i.e. Invoice No.48 was a clear and categorical
admission. Additionally, he argues that the Trial Court was justified in holding
that there was no proper justification for non-payment of the disputed invoices
or how late delivery of the consignment caused any prejudice to the
Appellants. Therefore, the impugned judgement need not be interfered with.
11. This Court is unable to agree with the contentions raised by the learned
Counsel for the Respondent. Material on record indicates that the admission of
liability, for the third invoice i.e. for Rs.80,094/-, by the Appellants tantamount
to only a conditional and qualified statement acknowledging that they had
issued a cheque for the payment of the said amount. It can in no way
whatsoever be construed to be an admission under the language of Order XII
Rule 6. Similarly, the said statement cannot be used to justify a decree for the
entire disputed amount given the fact that there was categorical denial of
liability by the Appellants with respect to the other two invoices.
12. The Apex Court in Payal Vision Limited v. Radhika Choudhary, (2012)
11 SCC 405, has explained the powers of a Court under this provision. The
relevant excerpts read as under :
"7. In a suit for recovery of possession from a tenant
whose tenancy is not protected under the provisions of
the Rent Control Act, all that is required to be
established by the plaintiff landlord is the existence of
the jural relationship of landlord and tenant between
the parties and the termination of the tenancy either by
lapse of time or by notice served by the landlord under
Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act. So long as
these two aspects are not in dispute the court can pass
a decree in terms of Order 12 Rule 6 CPC, which reads
as under:
“6. Judgment on admissions.—(1) Where admissions
of fact have been made either in the pleading or
otherwise, whether orally or in writing, the court
may at any stage of the suit, either on the
application of any party or of its own motion and
without waiting for the determination of any other
question between the parties, make such order or
give such judgment as it may think fit, having regard
to such admissions.
(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under subrule (1) a decree shall be drawn up in accordance
with the judgment and the decree shall bear the date
on which the judgment was pronounced.”
8. The above sufficiently empowers the court trying
the suit to deliver judgment based on admissions
whenever such admissions are sufficient for the grant
of the relief prayed for. Whether or not there was an
unequivocal and clear admission on either of the two
aspects to which we have referred above and which are
relevant to a suit for possession against a tenant is,
therefore, the only question that falls for determination
in this case and in every other case where the plaintiff
seeks to invoke the powers of the court under Order 12
Rule 6 CPC and prays for passing of the decree on the
basis of admission. Having said that we must add that
whether or not there is a clear admission upon the two
aspects noted above is a matter to be seen in the fact
situation prevailing in each case. Admission made on
the basis of pleadings in a given case cannot obviously
be taken as an admission in a different fact situation.
That precisely is the view taken by this Court in Jeevan
Diesels & Electricals Ltd. [(2010) 6 SCC 601 : (2010)
2 SCC (Civ) 745] relied upon by the High Court where
this Court has observed: (SCC p. 604, para 10)
“10. … Whether or not there is a clear,
unambiguous admission by one party of the case of
the other party is essentially a question of fact and
the decision of this question depends on the facts of
the case. The question, namely, whether there is a
clear admission or not cannot be decided on the
basis of a judicial precedent. Therefore, even
though the principles in Karam Kapahi [(2010) 4
SCC 753 : (2010) 2 SCC (Civ) 262] may be
unexceptionable they cannot be applied in the
instant case in view of totally different fact
situation.”
(emphasis supplied)
13. Similarly, in Hari Steel And General Industries Limited & Anr. v. Daljit
Singh & Ors., (2019) 20 SCC 425, the Apex Court has expanded upon the
need for categorical and unconditional admissions for passing a decree under
Order XII Rule 6, The Apex Court has held as under:-
"25. In the judgment in Himani Alloys Ltd. v. Tata
Steel Ltd. [Himani Alloys Ltd. v. Tata Steel Ltd., (2011)
15 SCC 273 : (2014) 2 SCC (Civ) 376] , nature and
scope of Order 12 Rule 6 has been considered by this
Court. In the aforesaid judgment this Court has held
that the discretion conferred under Order 12 Rule 6
CPC is to be exercised judiciously, keeping in mind
that a judgment on admission is a judgment without
trial which permanently denies any remedy to the
defendant. Para 11 of the judgment read as under :
(SCC pp. 276-77)
“11. It is true that a judgment can be given on an
“admission” contained in the minutes of a meeting.
But the admission should be categorical. It should
be a conscious and deliberate act of the party
making it, showing an intention to be bound by it.
Order 12 Rule 6 being an enabling provision, it is
neither mandatory nor peremptory but
discretionary. The court, on examination of the
facts and circumstances, has to exercise its judicial
discretion, keeping in mind that a judgment on
admission is a judgment without trial which
permanently denies any remedy to the defendant,
by way of an appeal on merits. Therefore unless
the admission is clear, unambiguous and
unconditional, the discretion of the court should
not be exercised to deny the valuable right of a
defendant to contest the claim. In short the
discretion should be used only when there is a clear
“admission” which can be acted upon. (See also
Uttam Singh Duggal & Co. Ltd. v. United Bank of
India [Uttam Singh Duggal & Co. Ltd. v. United
Bank of India, (2000) 7 SCC 120] , Karam Kapahi
v. Lal Chand Public Charitable Trust [Karam
Kapahi v. Lal Chand Public Charitable Trust,
(2010) 4 SCC 753 : (2010) 2 SCC (Civ) 262] and
Jeevan Diesels & Electricals Ltd. v. Jasbir Singh
Chadha [Jeevan Diesels & Electricals Ltd. v. Jasbir
Singh Chadha, (2010) 6 SCC 601 : (2010) 2 SCC
(Civ) 745] .) There is no such admission in this
case.”
26. In the judgment in S.M. Asif v. Virender Kumar
Bajaj [S.M. Asif v. Virender Kumar Bajaj, (2015) 9
SCC 287 : (2015) 4 SCC (Civ) 589] , this Court has
held that the power under Order 12 Rule 6 CPC is
discretionary and cannot be claimed as a right. It is
further held in the aforesaid case that where the
defendants have raised objections, which go to the root
of the case, it would not be appropriate to exercise
discretion under Order 12 Rule 6 CPC. Para 8 of the
judgment read as under : (SCC p. 291)
“8. The words in Order 12 Rule 6 CPC “may” and
“make such order …” show that the power under
Order 12 Rule 6 CPC is discretionary and cannot
be claimed as a matter of right. Judgment on
admission is not a matter of right and rather is a
matter of discretion of the court. Where the
defendants have raised objections which go to the
root of the case, it would not be appropriate to
exercise the discretion under Order 12 Rule 6 CPC.
The said rule is an enabling provision which
confers discretion on the court in delivering a
quick judgment on admission and to the extent of
the claim admitted by one of the parties of his
opponent's claim.”
27. In the judgment in Balraj Taneja v. Sunil Madan
[Balraj Taneja v. Sunil Madan, (1999) 8 SCC 396] ,
while considering the scope of Order 8 Rule 10 and
Order 12 Rule 6 CPC, this Court has held that the
court is not to act blindly upon the admission of a fact
made by the defendant in the written statement nor
should the court proceed to pass judgment blindly
merely because a written statement has not been filed
by the defendant traversing the facts set out by the
plaintiff in the plaint filed in the court."
(emphasis supplied)
14. The Apex Court in Karan Kapoor v. Madhuri Kumar, (2022) 10 SCC
496, held as under:
"23. Order 12 Rule 6 confers discretionary power to a
court who “may” at any stage of the suit or suits on
the application of any party or in its own motion and
without waiting for determination of any other
question between the parties makes such order or
gives such judgment as it may think fit having regard
to such admission.
24. Thus, legislative intent is clear by using the word
“may” and “as it may think fit” to the nature of
admission. The said power is discretionary which
should be only exercised when specific, clear and
categorical admission of facts and documents are on
record, otherwise the court can refuse to invoke the
power of Order 12 Rule 6. The said provision has
been brought with intent that if admission of facts
raised by one side is admitted by the other, and the
court is satisfied to the nature of admission, then the
parties are not compelled for full-fledged trial and the
judgment and order can be directed without taking
any evidence. Therefore, to save the time and money
of the court and respective parties, the said provision
has been brought in the statute. As per above
discussion, it is clear that to pass a judgment on
admission, the court if thinks fit may pass an order at
any stage of the suit. In case the judgment is
pronounced by the court a decree be drawn
accordingly and parties to the case is not required to
go for trial.
xxx
26. On the issue of discretion of Court to pass
judgment on admission, a three-Judge Bench of this
Court in S.M. Asif v. Virender Kumar Bajaj [S.M.
Asif v. Virender Kumar Bajaj, (2015) 9 SCC 287 :
(2015) 4 SCC (Civ) 589] made the legislative intent
clear to use the word “may” which clearly stipulates
that the power under Order 12 Rule 6CPC is
discretionary and cannot be claimed as a matter of
right. In the said case, the suit for eviction was filed
by the respondent landlord against the appellant
tenant. The relationship of tenancy was admitted
including the period of lease agreement. The
plaintiffs' claim was resisted by the defendant setting
up a plea that the property in question was agreed to
be sold by an agreement and the advance of Rs
82,50,000 was paid."
(emphasis supplied)
15. What emerges from the above discussion is that the language of Order
XII Rule 6 allows the Court to pass a decree during any stage of the suit either
upon application moved by any party or of its own accord for the entire dispute
in question or any part thereof on the basis of admissions made by any party
made in the pleadings or orally, taken as a whole. The purport of this provision
is not to bypass a full-fledged trial but to preserve judicial time and resources
when there are clear and unambiguous admissions. Similarly, the power
granted to a Court under this provision is comprehensive but qualified by the
use of the word “may” and it makes the exercise of this discretionary power
contingent upon clear, categorical and unambiguous admissions that would
enable the Court to pass a decree exclusively on the basis of those admissions.
16. In the facts of the present case, the Trial Court has relied upon the
Appellant’s limited and conditional admission of liability for Rs.80,094/- in
relation to Invoice No.0048 dated 11.06.2019 and erroneously treated the same
as sufficient to decree the entire claim of Rs.5,71,857/-. A perusal of the
material on record indicates that the Appellants herein have consistently denied
their liability with respect to Invoice No. 22 and Invoice No.23. The Appellant
has also contested all the claims advanced by the Respondent. The defence
advanced by the Appellant with respect to the two debit notes vis-à-vis the
disputed invoices, that Airway Bills had been forged and manipulated by the
Respondent are all triable issues which go to the root of the matter. It would be
improper to adjudicate upon those issues without proper appreciation and
discussion of evidence after determination and framing of triable issues. This is
not a case fit for passing a decree on the basis of admission and the Trial Court
has clearly applied the provision of Order XII Rule 6 erroneously.
17. Therefore, the impugned judgement is liable to be set aside and the
matter is remanded back to the Trial Court of competent jurisdiction. The
appeal is disposed of. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed.
18. The observations made in this judgement shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case and are limited to the correctness of the order passed by the
Trial Court under Order XII Rule 6. 