COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: CS(COMM) 1196/2025 & I.As.27765-68/2025
DATE: 14.11.2025 
PLAINTIFF: RI NETWORKS PRIVATE LIMITED
DEFENDANT: WORLD PHONE INTERNET SERVICES PRIVATE LIMITED
JUDGE: Justice PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR KAURAV 

----JUDGMENT----

The plaintiff, a Class ‗A‘ Internet Service Provider (‗ISP‘) has filed
the instant commercial suit against defendant no.1, a Category ‗A‘ Internet
Telephony Service Provider (‗ITSP‘), defendant nos. 2-4, who are the key
managerial personnel of defendant no. 1, and defendant no. 5, which is the
parent company of defendant no. 1, praying for, inter alia, a decree for
recovery of money payable by the defendants in terms of an Operational
Merger Agreement dated 11.09.2023 executed between the plaintiff and
defendant no. 1.
2. This case was first listed for hearing on 10.11.2025 and from the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties it had appeared that
there was a possibility of an amicable resolution to the dispute. Accordingly,
the matter was adjourned to 12.11.2025. Despite sincere efforts being made
by learned counsel for the parties, which the Court appreciates, no
settlement could be arrived at. Resultantly, the parties were heard at length
and the authorities relied upon them were examined in detail.
3. The Court has accepted the preliminary objection raised by the
learned counsel for defendant no. 1, and found that the present commercial
suit is not maintainable owing to the provisions of the Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India Act, 1997 (hereinafter ―TRAI Act‖), specifically Section
14 of the said Act. The instant dispute arising out of an Operational Merger
Agreement entered into between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1, both of
which are service providers, falls for the adjudication of the Telecom
Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (‗TDSAT‘). Defendants nos. 2-
5 being made party to the instant suit does not, importantly, oust the
jurisdiction of the TDSAT.
4. Before delving into the substantive reasoning given by the Court the
factual matrix shall be considered.
FACTUAL MATRIX
5. The facts as gleaned from the plaint are that on 11.09.2023 the
plaintiff and defendant no. 1 entered into an Operational Merger Agreement
(hereinafter ―OMA‖) with the participation/oversight of defendant no. 5, the
parent company of defendant no. 1. The said agreement was entered into for
the purposes of an operational merger for infrastructure, backend manpower
costs, and with a view to share cashflows.
6. In furtherance of the OMA, the plaintiff entered into the arrangement
for sharing of its resources, including personnel, as well as IT assets and
infrastructure with defendant no. 1, by way of shifting of the plaintiff‘s
employees from its offices at Gurugram and moving them to defendant no.
1‘s office at F-1/9, Pocket F, Okhla Phase I, Okhla Industrial Estate, New
Delhi – 110020. Additionally, the plaintiff entrusted its network
infrastructure and digital assets, including IP address pools, bandwidth
allocations, routers, and servers, to be kept/maintained/controlled by
defendant no. 1 for operational integration and management under the
OMA.
7. On 19.10.2025, the plaintiff communicated discovery of
higher/undisclosed statutory and contingent liabilities of defendant no. 1 and
sought to discuss next steps. Thereafter, on 23.10.2025, the defendants
issued a communication titled ―WPI–RI Exit‖, purporting to terminate the
operational merger with effect from 31.10.2025 and raising a demand of
approximately ₹2.01 crore.
8. The plaintiff on 28.10.2025, emailed defendant no. 5 proposing a
structured/transition-based separation to avoid disruption. Subsequently, on
29.10.2025, the plaintiff sent a letter/email proposing a 60-day orderly
demerger and calling for handover of all administrative/network credentials.
9. Soon thereafter, on 30.10.2025 and 31.10.2025, the plaintiff‘s staff
were restrained from entering the shared Okhla premises and plaintiff‘s
assets were detained. Further the defendants purportedly disabled/obstructed
the plaintiff‘s network during the day and again later the same night, causing
a service outage.
10. Finally, on 05.11.2025 according to the plaintiff, with fresh
disruptions being caused by the defendants to the plaintiff‘s network in
Bhagalpur, Rewari, Patna, etc., by suspending the primary administrative
account and retaining two-factor credentials, the present suit came to be
filed.
SUBMISSIONS MADE ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES
11. On the preliminary issue of maintainability, the submissions of the
learned counsel for the parties were the following.
12. Mr. Aditya Vaibhav Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
defendant no. 1 submitted that the instant dispute falls for the determination
of TDSAT and is squarely covered by Section 14 of the TRAI Act. The
submissions of the learned counsel may be summarized as under:
(i) The dispute in the instant case primarily stems from the
agreement between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1, both of
which are service providers, and for the adjudication of disputes
between them, the TDSAT has exclusive jurisdiction under
Section 14(a)(ii) read with Section 15 of the TRAI Act.
(ii) There is no splitting of the cause of action and defendant nos.
2-4 have been arrayed in their official capacity. Them being
made parties to the instant dispute therefore makes no
difference to the lis needing to be adjudicated by the TDSAT.
(iii) The learned counsel while stressing upon the averments made
in the plaint argued that joint and several liability of the
defendants have, apart from being mentioned in the prayer
clause, not been detailed/narrated in the plaint.
(iv) Reliance was placed on the decisions in Amrit Aneja, Sole
Proprietor of AACL Enterprises v. Siti Network Ltd.1
, World
Phone Internet Services Pvt. Ltd. v. One OTT Intertainment
Ltd. In Centre2
, and Hathway Digital Pvt. Ltd. v. Dhanraj
Datacom Services Pvt. Ltd. and Ors.3
13. Mr. Tanmaya Mehta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
plaintiff submitted that the instant dispute cannot be adjudicated upon by the
TDSAT under Section 14 of the TRAI Act and it is the civil court that shall
have jurisdiction over the present matter. The submissions of the learned
counsel may be summarized as under:
(i) The dispute concerns a private agreement entered into between
the plaintiff and defendant no. 1 and does not concern the
regulatory functions of the TDSAT, resultantly, it does not
require specialized adjudication.

1 Broadcasting Petition No. 429 of 2017, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi.
2 Comm. Arbitration Application (L) No. 34646 of 2022, High Court of Bombay.
3 MANU/TD/0012/2018, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi.
(ii) Even if it were to be assumed that a part of the cause of action
falls for the adjudication of the TDSAT, the same cannot confer
jurisdiction upon the tribunal for the whole case. This court
unlike the TDSAT has plenary powers, and is the only forum
that can entertain the present lis.
(iii) Significant emphasis was placed by the learned counsel on
defendants nos. 2-5 not being service providers within the
meaning of the TRAI Act, and the TDSAT, resultantly, not
having jurisdiction over the same.
(iv) In the alternative, it was submitted that if the Court were to
conclude that TDSAT does have jurisdiction to determine the
present case, leave may be granted to delete defendant no. 1
from the array of parties, and the suit be allowed to continue
against the remaining defendants.
(v) Reliance was placed on the decisions in Union of India v.
Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India
etc.4
, Hathway Digital Pvt. Ltd. v. Dhanraj Datacom Services
Pvt. Ltd. and Ors.5
, Amrit Aneja, Sole Proprietor of AACL
Enterprises v. Siti Network Ltd.6

4 Civil Appeal Nos. 6328, 6399 of 2015, Supreme Court of India.
5 MANU/TD/0012/2018, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi.
6 Broadcasting Petition No. 429 of 2017, Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi.
ANALYSIS
14. The learned counsel appearing for the parties have been heard at
length and the judgements relied upon by them have been perused.
15. The primary submission of the contesting defendant relates to the
maintainability of the instant suit in light of the provisions of the TRAI Act.
Before delving into specific sections of the said Act, it is appropriate to
consider the Statement of Object and Reasons (unamended) of the TRAI
Act. It reads as under:
“1. In the context of the National Telecom Policy, 1994,
which amongst other things, stresses on achieving the
universal service, bringing the quality of telecom services to
world standards, provisions of wide range of services to meet
the customers‟ demand at reasonable price,and participation
of the companies registered in India in the area of basic as
well as value added telecom services as also making
arrangements for protection and promotion of consumer
interest and ensuring fair competition, there is felt a need to
separate regulatory functions from service providing
functions which will be in keeping with the general trend in
the world. In the multi-operator situation arising out of
opening of basic as well as value added services in which
private operators will be competing with government
operators, there is a pressing need for an independent
telecom regulatory body for regulation of telecom services
for orderly and healthy growth of telecommunication
infrastructure apart from protection of consumer interest.
XXX XXX XXX
4. The powers and functions of the Authority, inter alia, are—
(i) ensuring technical compatibility and effective interrelationship between different service providers;
(ii) regulation of arrangement amongst service providers of
sharing their revenue derived from providing
telecommunication service;
(iii) ensuring compliance of licence conditions by all service
providers;
(iv) protection of the interest of the consumers of
telecommunication service;
(v) settlement of disputes between service providers;
(vi) fixation of rates for providing telecommunication service
within India and outside India;
(vii) ensuring effective compliance of universal service
obligations.
5. The Authority shall have an inbuilt dispute settlement
mechanism including procedure to be followed in this
regard as well as a scheme of punishment in the event of
non-compliance of its order.
6. The Authority will have to maintain transparency while
exercising its powers and functions. The powers and
functions would enable the Authority to perform a role of
watchdog for the telecom sector in an effective manner.
7. In order that the Authority functions in a truly
independent manner and discharges its assigned
responsibilities effectively, it is proposed to vest the
Authority with a statutory status.”
[Emphasis supplied]
16. The TRAI Act was amended by Act 2 of 2000. The amended
preamble of the TRAI Act reads as under:
“An Act to provide for the establishment of the Telecom
Regulatory Authority of India and the Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to regulate the
telecommunication services, adjudicate disputes, dispose of
appeals and to protect the interests of service providers and
consumers of the telecom sector, to promote and ensure
orderly growth of the telecom sector and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.”
[Emphasis supplied]
17. Reflecting the object and purpose of the Act, Section 14 establishes
the TDSAT and gives it powers to adjudicate upon disputes involving a
defined category of persons. To make this authority the exclusive body,
capable of entertaining a specialized lis, Section 15 of the TRAI Act bars the
jurisdiction of civil courts over matters which the Appellate Tribunal is
competent to adjudicate upon under the TRAI Act. The said provisions read
as under:
―14. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.
The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an
Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Telecom Disputes
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to—
(a) adjudicate any dispute—
(i) between a licensor and a licensee;
(ii) between two or more service providers;
(iii) between a service provider and a group of
consumers:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in respect of
matters relating to—
(A) the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice
and unfair trade practice which are subject to the
jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade
Practices Commission established under sub-section (1) of
section 5 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices
Act, 1969(54 of 1969);
(B) the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable
before a Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum or a
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National
Consumer Redressal Commission established under section 9
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986(68 of 1986);
(C) the dispute between telegraph authority and any other
person referred to in sub-section (1) of section 7B of the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885);
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction,
decision or order of the Authority under this Act.
(c) exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred
on—
(i) the Appellate Tribunal under the Information Technology
Act, 2000 (21 of 2000); and (ii) the Appellate Tribunal under
the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act,
2008 (27 of 2008).
15. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter which the Appellate
Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine and
no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority
in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of
any power conferred by or under this Act.
[Emphasis supplied]
18. The Supreme Court in Union of India v. Tata Teleservices
Mahrarashtra Ltd.7
, noted that powers of the adjudicating authority must
not be interpreted in a manner that frustrates the object sought to be
achieved by the Act. The material portions of the judgement reads as under:
“17. Normally, when a specialised tribunal is constituted
for dealing with disputes coming under it of a particular
nature taking in serious technical aspects, the attempt must
be to construe the jurisdiction conferred on it in a manner as
not to frustrate the object sought to be achieved by the Act. In
this context, the ousting of the jurisdiction of the civil court
contained in Section 15 and Section 27 of the Act has also to
be kept in mind. The subject to be dealt with under the Act
has considerable technical overtones which normally a civil

7
2007 (7) SCC 517.
court, at least as of now, is ill equipped to handle and this
aspect cannot be ignored while defining the jurisdiction of
TDSAT”
19. This Court in Gaur Distributors v. Hathway Cable and Datacom
Ltd.8
, sat in adjudication of a Section 11 petition under the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter ―Arbitration Act‖), where the parties
therein were service providers as defined under the TRAI Act. The Court
concluded that the operation of the Arbitration Act has been barred by
Sections 14 and 15 of the TRAI Act, which is the sole authority to decide
upon the dispute between service providers. To reach this finding the Court
relied upon two decisions—first, was a previous decision of this Court in
Hathway Cable & Datacom Pvt. Ltd. v. Banjara Telelinks Pvt. Ltd.9
and
the other was the decision of the Appellate Tribunal in Aircel Digilink India
Ltd. v. Union of India.
10
20. In Hathway Cable & Datacom Pvt. Ltd., this Court noted that
disputes between two service providers should be adjudicated in the first
instance only by the TDSAT. The material portion reads as under:
“11. It was also held by the Bench of this Court that
notwithstanding the decision dated 31st August 2005 passed
by the TDSAT in Petition No. 52 (C) of 2005, in view of the
law explained by the Supreme Court in Cellular Operators
Association of India v. Union of India (2003) 3 SCC
186 and Union of India v. Tata Teleservices (Maharashtra)
Limited (2007) 7 SCC 517, disputes between two service
providers should be adjudicated in the first instance only by
the TDSAT. It may be noticed that against the decision of the

8
2016 SCC OnLine Del 4605.
9 C.S. (OS) No. 1358/2006, Order Dt. 30th July, 2009, Delhi High Court.
10 Petition No. 06/2003, Order dt. 6th January, 2005, Appellate Tribunal.
TDSAT, an appeal is maintainable as a matter of right to the
Supreme Court of India in terms of Section 18 of the TRAI
Act.”
[Emphasis supplied]
21. Further, the Appellate Tribunal in Aircel Digilink India Ltd. v. Union
of India,
11 pertinently observed that disputes which may prima facie appear
to be a simplicitor civil lis, may have broader ramifications potentially
affecting consumers. The material portion of the judgement reads as under:
“18. It is a matter of public policy laid in the public interest
that telecom, broadcasting and cable services dispute which
affect a large body of consumers all over the country should
be amenable to one expert body. What will happen if in a
dispute between two service providers in telecom sector
arising out of an interconnection agreement, a service
provider revokes the interconnection agreement. For these
two, it may be dispute of recovery of money or damages or of
technical nature but disconnection deprives consumers of
access of one network to the other network. Consequences
are not limited to the two service providers only but are of
far reaching nature not difficult to imagine. Similarly, if in
cable industry, a broadcaster and a multi-service operator
sever their relations under alloyed breach of agreement, it
affects again a large body of consumers who would not be
able to avail the signals for various channels and yet having
made payment. An arbitrator will find himself lacking
jurisdiction to give relief to hapless consumers.
19. The Act is a complete code. TDSAT has exclusive
jurisdiction to adjudicate any dispute between the parties and
also exercises exclusive appellate jurisdiction against any
direction, decision or order of the TRAI. Sections 14 to 20 in
Chapter IV of the Act deal with the jurisdiction and
procedure of the TDSAT. Section 14M and 14N provides for

11 Petition No. 06/2003, Order dt. 6th January, 2005, Appellate Tribunal.
transfer of pending cases before TRAI and appeals in the
High Court to TDSAT after its constitution by the amending
Act 2 of 2000 which carne into force on 21.2.2002.
Jurisdiction of civil courts is barred in respect of any matter
which TDSAT is empowered by or under the Act to determine
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or any
authority which includes arbitrator in respect of any action
taken or to be taken in pursuance of the powers conferred by
this Act on TDSAT. Orders passed by the TDSAT are
executable as a decree and provision also exists for
imposition of penalty for wilful failure to comply with the
orders of the TDSAT. Under Section 18 of the Act, appeal
lies to the Supreme Court against any order not being an
interlocutory order of TDSAT on one or more of the grounds
specified in the Section 100of the Civil Procedure Code. The
Supreme Court in the case of Cellular Operators Association
of India v. Union of India (2003) 1 Comp LJ 1 (SC) : (2003)
3 SCC 186 has observed that appeal lies to the Supreme
Court against the order of TDSAT only on the substantial
question of law. The Preamble of the Act discloses as well the
intent and object of the Legislature to confer exclusive
jurisdiction to TDSAT to the exclusion of any court or
authority.
20. The Arbitration Act, 1996, is a general Act and it will
apply to all the arbitration agreements but the Act, i.e., TRAI
Act is Special Act and applies to telecom sector and by
notification issued on 9 January, 2004, also applies to
broadcasting and cable services. The intention of the
Legislature in ousting the jurisdiction of all other courts and
all other authorities is quite apparent and it is to ensure and
enable one single authority, i.e., TDSAT, to uniformly
regulate this vital telecom sector which includes
broadcasting and cable TV sector. Proper functioning of
various stakeholders in this telecom sector is vital to the
development and to safeguard interest of the consumers at
large who are the beneficiaries of these services. It may also
be noticed that telecom sector is subject to various
regulations issued by TRAI which even monitors the
interconnection between various service providers. In
the Cellular Operators Association of India v. Union of
India (2003) 1 Comp LJ 1 (SC) : (2003) 3 SCC 186, the
Supreme Court has held that jurisdiction of TDSAT under
Section 14 cannot be held merely to be supervisory
jurisdiction and that it is the only forum for addressing the
grievances of aggrieved party inasmuch as the appellate
jurisdiction to the Supreme Court is only on the substantial
question of law and jurisdiction of Civil Courts for filing a
suit is ousted. TDSAT has power to adjudicate any dispute.
The Supreme Court in the case of West Bengal [Telecom]
Regulatory Commission v. CESE Ltd. : (2002) 8 SCC
715 has even recommended the establishment of a similar
expert Tribunal like TDSAT in telecom sector in other similar
regulatory bodies. The question of exclusive jurisdiction of
an expert body like TDSAT has recently been discussed in a
decision of Supreme Court in the case of Clariant
International Ltd. v. Securities and Exchange Board of
India (2004) 4 Comp LJ 52 (SC) : (2004) 8 SCC 524 (paras
64 to 82).”
22. The instant dispute fundamentally arises from the purported breaches
of the OMA, as also the losses caused to the plaintiff during the execution of
the said agreement. Upon carefully scrutinising the plaint, it is observed that
the primary grievances which the plaintiff has agitated are:
22.1. Under the heading ―Flagrant and Deliberate Breaches of the
Agreement [i.e., the OMA]‖, the plaintiff has narrated commercial
and financial breaches of the defendants. These include, inter alia,
non-disclosure of liabilities and long-standing legal violations,
including unpaid voice license fees under the Department of
Telecommunications.
22.2. Further, it is the alleged that under the OMA, the plaintiff is
entitled to recover from defendant no. 1 Rs. 52,41,994. It is also
claimed that the defendants unilaterally terminated the OMA and
raised an arbitrary demand of Rs. 2,01,22,070 /-.
22.3. Under the heading ―Disruption of Business‖, the plaintiff claims,
inter alia, that in violation of the OMA—(1) the defendants
wrongfully restrained employees of the Plaintiff from entering the
shared premises; (2) disabled all internet access to the plaintiff‘s
network customers, leading to widespread service disruption; (3)
shutting down servers and network nodes without authorisation;
(4) misleading customers and channel partners by issuing false
communications; and (5) blocking monitoring and remote access
tools of the plaintiff.
23. Importantly, the above-acts have, according to the plaintiff, severely
affected its customers. Paragraph no. 18.18 of the plaint states that 570
corporate clients, 14,919 retain clients and 283 network partners were
affected. This portion of the plaint is reproduced as under:
“18.18. It is further submitted that due to the unauthorised
and malicious disruption in the network infrastructure of RI
Networks by Defendant No. 1, the Plaintiff‟s entire
operational framework across India was severely impacted.
As a direct consequence of the Defendants‟ unlawful
interference:
A. 570 corporate client links were affected;
B. 14,919 retail client links were disrupted; and
C. 283 network partners suffered complete service outage.”
24. The plaintiff has further highlighted the seriousness of the
Defendant‘s breaches at paragraph no. 21 of the plaint wherein it states that
approximately 19,000 residential users including hospitals, schools and
government institutions have been affected. The material portion is
reproduced as under:
“21. While discussions regarding the handover of assets
were ongoing, the Defendants deliberately interrupted the
Plaintiff‟s network, blocked IP addresses, and restricted
email domain access, thereby paralysing the Plaintiff‟s
services to approximately 19,000 residential users and
hundreds of commercial users, including hospitals, schools,
government institutions, and corporate clients. This
deliberate network obstruction resulted in a total service
outage, causing grave operational losses. It was only upon
repeated intervention by the Plaintiff that partial network
access was temporarily restored.”
25. Indeed, Mr. Mehta had further, during the course of the hearing,
vociferously contended that customers of the plaintiff have been seriously
affected owing to the acts of the defendants. It is, therefore, clear that the
dispute which has arisen between the parties to the instant suit, does in fact
affect customers, and if the numbers given by the plaintiff are to be
accepted, a substantial number of them.
26. If the object and purpose of the TRAI Act is to be given effect, the
instant lis which is between service providers and admittedly affects
customers, ought to be decided by the TDSAT. The specialised tribunal
under the TRAI Act, enacted for protecting and promoting consumer
interest, ought to be allowed to adjudicate upon the instant dispute.
27. Further, it is also seen that the present dispute has, at its core, the
OMA entered into between the plaintiff and defendant no. 1 for the purpose
of merging their operations and enhancing their business capabilities. This
agreement between two service providers, directly concerns the services that
they provide to the customers. The alleged wrongful acts of the defendants
in the instant case have their basis in the OMA, which relates to their
operation as service providers.
28. An argument similar to that being raised by the learned counsel for
the plaintiff had been put before the Bombay High Court in World Phone
Internet Services Pvt. Ltd.. The petitioner therein argued that the dispute
therein arises from a private agreement which does not warrant the
application of the TRAI Act or the TDSAT. The argument as recorded at
paragraph no. 27 reads as under:
“27. In the present case, Advocate Harit has submitted
strenuously that the MOU between the parties, is a purely
private arrangement entered between themselves, and in any
case, the dispute do not involve the TRAI so as to warrant it‟s
reference to TDSAT. He would submit that the business
arrangement worked out between the parties amongst
themselves, with OIL in the business of providing broadband,
internet, bandwidth. True it is. That the parties decided to
explore the possibility of coming on a joint platform, to scale
up the business in Pan-India by providing State of Art
Services to the subscribers by keeping the charges at the best
minimum, but they also agreed for, if certain obligations
which are to be discharged under the MOU or it‟s addendum
and contemplated „event of default‟. In such case, the clause
having been invoked, they should be left to themselves to
resolve their dispute through the mechanism prescribed
under the MOU itself.”
29. The said argument was rejected by the Bombay High Court in the
following words:
“28. …In short, the dispute which has arisen between the
parties is ultimately likely to affect the customers/subscribers
of the internet services, and it is incomprehensible to assume
that the dispute is only between two parties”
30. In the instant case, it has been admitted by the plaintiff that consumers
in fact have been affected. That being the case, the TDSAT under Section 14
read with Section 15 of the TRAI Act shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
adjudicate upon the present dispute which arises between two service
providers.
31. Two specific arguments of the learned counsel of the plaintiff may
now be considered. First, Mr. Mehta claims that the TDSAT cannot, under
Section 14 of the TRAI Act, adjudicate upon claims made by the plaintiff
against non-service providers i.e., defendant nos. 2-5. That being the case,
the cause of action which has accrued against defendant nos. 2-5 needs to be
split from that which arises against defendant no. 1. The TDSAT being
incapable from adjudicating upon the former, this Court must entertain the
present plaint. For this argument he relies upon the judgement of the
Supreme Court in Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of
India etc..
32. The argument pertaining to the splitting of cause of action can only
hold ground if the causes of action can be shown to have accrued distinctly
and independently. Meaning thereby, that if the plaintiff had agitated such
issues against defendant nos. 2-5, which have their own independent
existence, in exclusion to the complaints against defendant no. 1, the
argument could have possibly been accepted.
33. However, in the instant case, very many paragraphs of the plaint
narrate defendant nos. 2-4 acting on behalf of defendant no. 1. It is also
appropriate to lay stress on who defendant nos. 2-4 are in the instant case.
The plaint at paragraph no. 9 describes them in the following manner:
“9. Defendant Nos. 2 to 4 are the key managerial personnel
of Defendant No. 1. Mr. Aditya Singh Ahluwalia (Defendant
No. 2) and Mr. Venkatramanan (Defendant No. 3) are
Directors of Defendant No. 1, while Mr. Jeevan
Singh(Defendant No. 4) serves as the Head of Network of the
said company. All the aforesaid Defendants have their
office at the same address as Defendant No. 1 and are
responsible for the overall management, operations, and
decision-making of the company.”
[Emphasis Supplied]
A bare perusal of the plaint describes defendant nos. 2-4 as those responsible
for the acts of the company. Naturally, an artificial legal entity cannot act on
its own. To that extent merely because defendant nos. 2-4 have been arrayed
as a party, TDSAT‘s jurisdiction would not get ousted.
34. Further, qua the role of defendant no. 5, the plaintiff has, inter alia,
stated that it is being arrayed on grounds of it being vicariously liable for the
acts of defendant no. 1. The material portion of the plaint reads as under:
“18.8 However, instead of cooperating, the Defendant No. 5
through Defendant No. 2 initiated their wrongful acts
abruptly….
XXX XXX XXX
32. Without prejudice to the foregoing, it is further submitted
that the relationship between Defendant No. 5 and Defendant
No. 1 squarely attracts the doctrine of agency or
instrumentality as recognized under Indian law. Where a
parent company directs, dominates, and benefits from the
actions of its subsidiary, such subsidiary is deemed to act as
the agent or instrumentality of the parent, rendering the
parent company jointly and severally liable for the acts so
committed. In the present case, Defendant No. 5 conceived
and directed the operational merger, appointed its promoter
to exercise oversight under Clause 15 of the agreement, and
permitted Defendant No. 1 to implement the operational
integration in India for its commercial benefit. The acts of
interference, obstruction, and disruption carried out by
Defendant No. 1 were in furtherance of Defendant No. 5‟s
business arrangement and within the scope of its control.
Accordingly, Defendant No. 5 is vicariously and jointly liable
in India for the conduct, breaches, and wrongful acts of its
wholly-owned subsidiary, Defendant No. 1.”
35. There is, therefore, no separate or independent cause of action qua a
non-service provider that would warrant ouster of TDSAT‘s jurisdiction
under Section 14 of the TRAI Act. To that extent, while the judgement of
Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India etc.. cannot be
doubted, it is not found relevant to the instant dispute.
36. The second argument of Mr. Mehta pertains to subject-matter bar. It is
submitted by him that the instant dispute cannot be adjudicated upon by the
TDSAT owing to the subject-matter of the instant dispute. For this
argument, reliance was placed on the decisions of the TDSAT in Amrit
Aneja and Hathway Digital Pvt. Ltd..
37. In Amrit Aneja, the TDSAT found that it did not have jurisdiction to
adjudicate upon a dispute between a master and servant. The petitioner
therein was, further, not a service provider, licensor, licensee, or a group of
consumers, as is required by Section 14 of the TRAI Act. The judgement is,
therefore, distinguishable on facts. Similarly, in Hathway Digital Pvt. Ltd.,
paragraph no. 12 of the judgement narrates that the primary respondents had
not been sued in their capacity of service providers, and resultantly the
petition was not found maintainable. This judgement also is distinguishable
on facts.
38. From the discussion above, it can be safely concluded that the dispute
in the instant case originating from the OMA between the plaintiff and the
defendant no. 1, both being service providers, and further affecting a
substantial number of customers/subscribers is to fall for the exclusive
adjudication of the TDSAT under Section 14 read with Section 15 of the
TRAI Act.
39. The present commercial suit is, therefore, to be adjudicated by the
TDSAT under the provisions of the TRAI Act. The instant suit is barred by
law and the plaint deserves to be rejected.
40. Ordered accordingly. Pending applications also stand disposed of.