COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: 2889/2024
DATE: 30.10.2025
PLAINTIFF: Ajay Jain
DEFENDENT: Anil Sharma
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Girish Kathpalia

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. Petitioner/defendant has assailed orders dated 23.08.2023 and
15.03.2024 of the learned Commercial Court. By way of order dated
23.08.2023, the Written Statement filed beyond the prescribed period was
taken off the record as the same was not accompanied with any application
explaining the delay in filing the Written Statement and seeking condonation
thereof. By way of order dated 15.03.2024, the application under Section 5
of the Limitation Act filed on behalf of petitioner/defendant was dismissed.
2. Broadly speaking, the relevant circumstances are as follows.
Summons of the commercial suit were served on the petitioner/defendant on
28.04.2023 but he filed the Written Statement on 18.07.2023, that too
filing the Written Statement, and seeking condonation of that delay.
Therefore, the learned trial court directed the Written Statement to be taken
off the record and adjourned the matter to 09.10.2023. Thereafter, it is only
on 27.01.2024 that petitioner/defendant filed an application under Section 5
of the Limitation Act for condonation of delay in filing the Written
Statement. That application also was dismissed vide order dated 15.03.2024.
3. Learned counsel for petitioner/defendant contends that the impugned
order is not sustainable in the eyes of law because the petitioner/defendant
had a fit case for condonation of delay in filing the Written Statement as the
summons were served on the petitioner/defendant through his brother. It is
further submitted that since courts were on summer vacation and learned
counsel himself fell ill, he could not file the application for condonation of
delay in time. It is contended that since the Written Statement was filed
within the outer limit of 120 days after service of summons, the application
for condonation of delay ought to have been allowed.
4. Learned counsel for respondent/plaintiff supports the impugned
orders.
5. As mentioned above, summons of the suit were admittedly served on
28.04.2023 on the petitioner/defendant through his brother.
5.1 The provision under Order V Rule 15 CPC clearly stipulates that
service of summons is sought to be effected on him at his residence and
there is no likelihood of his being found at the residence within a reasonable
time and he has no agent empowered to accept service of summons on his
behalf, service of summons may be made on any adult member of the
family, whether male or female, who is residing with him.
5.2 Admittedly, brother of the defendant who received the summons of
the suit at the residential address of the petitioner/defendant, is an adult
member of his family.
5.3 Service of summons having been done on 28.04.2023, statutory
period of 30 days to file Written Statement as a matter of right expired on
27.05.2023. But admittedly, no Written Statement was filed till that day. The
Written Statement was filed only on 18.07.2023 without any explanation
qua the delay.
6. The provision under Order VIII Rule 1 CPC as amended by the
Commercial Courts Act, clearly stipulates in its proviso that where the
defendant fails to file the Written Statement within 30 days of service of
summons, he shall be allowed to file the Written Statement on such other
day as may be specified by the court for the reasons to be recorded in
writing but which shall not be later than 120 days from the date of service of
summons. The provision specifically stipulates that on expiry of 120 days
from date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file
taken on record.
7. Contention of learned counsel for petitioner/defendant that the
Written Statement was filed within the outer limit of 120 days after service
of summons cannot be accepted because when the same was filed, it was not
accompanied with an application seeking condonation of delay.
7.1 The expression “for reasons to be recorded in writing” used in the
amended proviso to Order VIII Rule 1 CPC establishes the significance of a
formal application seeking delay condonation, in the sense that while
condoning the delay in filing the Written Statement after 30 days of service
the court has to record the reasons in writing, which reasons have to be
furnished by the defendant by way of an application.
7.2 Further, the expression “the court shall not allow the Written
Statement to be taken on record” in case the same is filed 120 days after the
expiry of service of summons also amplifies the intention of the legislature
to ensure strict adherence to timelines in commercial suits. Any
interpretation to dilute these expressions would frustrate the very object
behind enactment of the Commercial Courts Act.
8. Not a whisper has been advanced from the side of
petitioner/defendant as to why an application seeking condonation of delay
was not filed immediately after the order dated 23.08.2023, which order
prescribed period of 30 days after service of summons was not accompanied
with an application seeking condonation of delay, so the same cannot be
taken on record.
8.1 The submission of learned counsel for petitioner/defendant as regards
summer vacation and his illness, fails to convince insofar as the rejection of
the Written Statement was on 23.08.2023 (when there were no vacation) and
illness of learned counsel occurred on 23.02.2024 (as per medical record
Annexure A-6).
8.2. At this stage, learned counsel for petitioner/defendant also contends
that even the respondent/plaintiff was not diligent in pursuing the suit as he
took an adjournment on the very first date and thereafter, took time to file
the requisite court fees. Even this, to my mind, cannot be a ground falling
within the scope of proviso to Order VIII Rule 1 CPC. Besides, this ground
appears to have not been taken before the trial court or even in the present
petition.
9. It is writ large that the petitioner/defendant was deliberately trying to
protract the proceedings in order to frustrate the respondent/plaintiff. Any
indulgence in such matters would militate against the very object behind
enactment of the Commercial Courts Act which was to expeditiously decide
the commercial litigation.
any perversity in the impugned orders, so the same are upheld and the
present petition is dismissed. Accompanying application also stands
disposed of.
GIRISH KATHPALIA
(JUDGE)
OCTOBER 30, 2025/dr