COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: RFA(COMM) 331/2025, CM APPL. 34907/2025, CM APPL. 34908/2025 & CM APPL. 34909/2025
DATE: 10.11.2025
PLAINTIFF: AGGARWAL POLYMERS INDIA & ANR.
DEFENDANT: SRI RAM PLASTOCHEM PVT LTD. 
JUDGE: Justice C. HARI SHANKAR & Justice OM PRAKASH SHUKLA 

----JUDGMENT-----

This application seeks condonation of an inordinate delay of
780 days in filing RFA (Comm) 331/2025.
2. On the aspect of delay in commercial matters, the Supreme
Court has taken an extremely strict view, as is reflected from the
following passages from the decision in Government of
Maharashtra v Borse Bros. Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd1
:
“63. Given the aforesaid and the object of speedy disposal
sought to be achieved both under the Arbitration Act and the
Commercial Courts Act, for appeals filed under Section 37 of the
Arbitration Act that are governed by Articles 116 and 117 of the

1
(2021) 6 SCC 460

Limitation Act or Section 13(1-A) of the Commercial Courts Act,
a delay beyond 90 days, 30 days or 60 days, respectively, is to be
condoned by way of exception and not by way of rule. In a fit case
in which a party has otherwise acted bona fide and not in a
negligent manner, a short delay beyond such period can, in the
discretion of the court, be condoned, always bearing in mind that
the other side of the picture is that the opposite party may have
acquired both in equity and justice, what may now be lost by the
first party's inaction, negligence or laches.”
3. We, therefore, cannot condone delay as inordinate as 780 days
without cogent grounds having been made out by the appellants
justifying such condonation.
4. We have heard Ms. Ruchi Gupta, learned Counsel for the
appellants at some length on this application. Ms. Gupta’s contention
is that fraud had been committed by the respondent and that, where
fraud is committed, limitation does not enter the picture. She relies,
for this purpose, on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Vishnu
Vardhan v State of UP2
.
5. We do not deem it necessary to advert to the relevant paragraph
from the said decision, as the proposition mooted by Ms. Ruchi Gupta
is unexceptional. There can be no doubt about the fact that fraud
unravels everything, ecclesiastical as well as temporal, and that, where
fraud is found to exist, all equities stand divested. If the respondent
had committed a fraud, there can be no doubt about the fact that the
appellants might not be hit by limitation.
6. We, therefore, called upon Ms. Gupta to substantiate her

2 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1501

argument that there was fraud committed by the respondent.
7. Ms. Gupta’s only contention, on the basis of which she bases
the allegation of fraud, is based on a “certificate of non-starter report”
dated 3 December 2020 issued by the North District Legal Services
Authority3
, which reads as under:
“Ref.334/mediation/comm.-dispute/north/2020 Dated 03.12.2020
Certificate of Non-Starter Report
Name of the applicant: M/s. Sri Ram Plastochem Pvt. Ltd
Date of application for pre-Institution mediation:
02.11.2020.
Name of opposite party: M/s Aggarwal Polymers India &
 Ors!
Date scheduled for obtaining consent of opposite party:
 19.11.2020, 03.12.2020.
Report made under rule 3(4) or 3(6): Under Rule 3(6).
Non Starter Report reason: Notice/Final Notice served to
the respondent and the respondent failed to give consent
before this Authority on the fixed date mentioned in the
Notice/ Final Notice.
It seems that respondent is not interested in the PreInstitution Mediation Process.
Sd.
 Harjeet Singh Jaspal
Secretary- North District
District Legal Services Authority
Rohini Courts, Delhi.”
8. We may note that the afore-extracted certificate was issued in

3
“DLSA”, hereinafter

view of the mandate of Section 12A of the Commercial Courts Act,
2015, which requires pre-institution mediation before any commercial
suit is instituted. The respondent relied on the aforesaid certificate of
“non-starter report” issued by the North DLSA to contend that Section
12A stood exhausted.
9. Ms. Gupta submits that the statement, in the aforesaid
certificate, that notice had been served on the appellants, and the
appellants had failed to give consent to the North DLSA, is incorrect
as no notice was sent or served on the appellant by any means known
to law.
10. That, however, if anything, can only be an error in the
certificate of non-starter report dated 3 December 2020. It is not Ms.
Gupta’s contention - as it cannot be – that there was any collusion
between the North DLSA and the respondent.
11. In that view of the matter, even if it were to be presumed, for
the sake of argument, that Ms. Gupta’s contention regarding the
reference to the notice having been served on the appellants in the
certificate of non-starter report issued by the North DLSA is incorrect,
that cannot translate into fraud having been committed by the
respondent.
12. We may, in this context, advert to certain authorities which
have expounded the concept of fraud when committed by a litigant.

13. S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu v Jagannath4 defines “fraud” as
“an act of deliberate deception with the design of securing something
by taking unfair advantage of another” and “a deception in order to
gain by another’s loss … a cheating intended to get an advantage”.
Ram Chandra Singh v Savitri Devi5
squarely addressed the concept
of fraud in litigation, and held:
“15. Commission of fraud on court and suppression of material
facts are the core issues involved in these matters. Fraud as is well
known vitiates every solemn act. Fraud and justice never dwell
together.
16. Fraud is a conduct either by letter or words, which induces
the other person or authority to take a definite determinative stand
as a response to the conduct of the former either by word or letter.
17. It is also well settled that misrepresentation itself amounts
to fraud. Indeed, innocent misrepresentation may also give reason
to claim relief against fraud.
18. A fraudulent misrepresentation is called deceit and consists
in leading a man into damage by wilfully or recklessly causing him
to believe and act on falsehood. It is a fraud in law if a party makes
representations which he knows to be false, and injury ensues
therefrom although the motive from which the representations
proceeded may not have been bad.
19. In Derry v Peek6
it was held:
“In an action of deceit the plaintiff must prove actual fraud.
Fraud is proved when it is shown that a false representation
has been made knowingly, or without belief in its truth, or
recklessly, without caring whether it be true or false.
A false statement, made through carelessness and without
reasonable ground for believing it to be true, may be
evidence of fraud but does not necessarily amount to fraud.
Such a statement, if made in the honest belief that it is true,
is not fraudulent and does not render the person making it
liable to an action of deceit.

4
(1994) 1 SCC 1
5
(2003) 8 SCC 319
6
(1889) 14 AC 337

*****
22. Recently this Court by an order dated 3-9-2003 in Ram
Preeti Yadav v U.P. Board of High School & Intermediate
Education7 held:
“13. Fraud is a conduct either by letter or words, which
induces the other person or authority to take a definite
determinative stand as a response to the conduct of the
former either by words or letter. Although negligence is not
fraud but it can be evidence on fraud. (See Derry v Peek.)
14. In Lazarus Estates Ltd. v Beasley8
the Court of
Appeal stated the law thus:
‘I cannot accede to this argument for a moment. No
court in this land will allow a person to keep an
advantage which he has obtained by fraud. No
judgment of a court, no order of a minister, can be
allowed to stand if it has been obtained by fraud.
Fraud unravels everything. The court is careful not
to find fraud unless it is distinctly pleaded and
proved; but once it is proved it vitiates judgments,
contracts and all transactions whatsoever;’
15. In S.P. Chengalvaraya Naidu v Jagannath this
Court stated that fraud avoids all judicial acts, ecclesiastical
or temporal.”
23. An act of fraud on court is always viewed seriously. A
collusion or conspiracy with a view to deprive the rights of the
others in relation to a property would render the transaction void ab
initio. Fraud and deception are synonymous.
24. In Arlidge & Parry on Fraud, it is stated at p. 21:
“Indeed, the word sometimes appears to be virtually
synonymous with ‘deception’, as in the offence (now
repealed) of obtaining credit by fraud. It is true that in this
context ‘fraud’ included certain kinds of conduct which did
not amount to false pretences, since the definition referred
to an obtaining of credit ‘under false pretences, or by means
of any other fraud’. In Jones, for example, a man who
ordered a meal without pointing out that he had no money
was held to be guilty of obtaining credit by fraud but not of

7
(2003) 8 SCC 311
8
(1956) 1 All ER 341

obtaining the meal by false pretences: his conduct, though
fraudulent, did not amount to a false pretence. Similarly, it
has been suggested that a charge of conspiracy to defraud
may be used where a ‘false front’ has been presented to the
public (e.g. a business appears to be reputable and
creditworthy when in fact it is neither) but there has been
nothing so concrete as a false pretence. However, the
concept of deception (as defined in the Theft Act, 1968) is
broader than that of a false pretence in that (inter alia) it
includes a misrepresentation as to the defendant's
intentions; both Jones and the ‘false front’ could now be
treated as cases of obtaining property by deception.”
25. Although in a given case a deception may not amount to
fraud, fraud is anathema to all equitable principles and any affair
tainted with fraud cannot be perpetuated or saved by the
application of any equitable doctrine including res judicata.”
14. Shrisht Dhawan v Shaw Brothers
9
is also instructive in this
regard:
“20. Fraud and collusion vitiate even the most solemn
proceedings in any civilised system of jurisprudence. It is a
concept descriptive of human conduct. Michael Levi likens a
fraudster to Milton's sorcerer, Comus, who exulted in his ability to,
‘wing me into the easy-hearted man and trap him into snares’. It
has been defined as an act of trickery or deceit. In Webster's Third
New International Dictionary fraud in equity has been defined as
an act or omission to act or concealment by which one person
obtains an advantage against conscience over another or which
equity or public policy forbids as being prejudicial to another.
In Black's Legal Dictionary, fraud is defined as an intentional
perversion of truth for the purpose of inducing another in reliance
upon it to part with some valuable thing belonging to him or
surrender a legal right; a false representation of a matter of fact
whether by words or by conduct, by false or misleading
allegations, or by concealment of that which should have been
disclosed, which deceives and is intended to deceive another so
that he shall act upon it to his legal injury. In Concise Oxford
Dictionary, it has been defined as criminal deception, use of false
representation to gain unjust advantage; dishonest artifice or trick.
According to Halsbury's Laws of England, a representation is
deemed to have been false, and therefore a misrepresentation, if it

9
(1992) 1 SCC 534

was at the material date false in substance and in fact. Section 17
of the Contract Act defines fraud as act committed by a party to a
contract with intent to deceive another. From dictionary meaning
or even otherwise fraud arises out of deliberate active role of
representator about a fact which he knows to be untrue yet he
succeeds in misleading the representee by making him believe it to
be true. The representation to become fraudulent must be of a fact
with knowledge that it was false. In a leading English case
[Derry v Peek] what constitutes fraud was described thus:
“[F]raud is proved when it is shown that a false
representation has been made (i) knowingly, or (ii) without
belief in its truth, or (iii) recklessly, careless whether it be
true or false.”
But fraud in public law is not the same as fraud in private law. Nor
can the ingredients which establish fraud in commercial transaction
be of assistance in determining fraud in Administrative Law. It has
been aptly observed by Lord Bridge in Khawaja v Secretary of
State for Home Deptt.10, that it is dangerous to introduce maxims
of common law as to effect of fraud while determining fraud in
relation to statutory law. In Pankaj Bhargava v Mohinder
Nath11
, it was observed that fraud in relation to statute must be a
colourable transaction to evade the provisions of a statute. “If a
statute has been passed for some one particular purpose, a court of
law will not countenance any attempt which may be made to
extend the operation of the Act to something else which is quite
foreign to its object and beyond its scope.” [Craies on Statute Law,
7th edn., p. 79] Present day concept of fraud on statute has veered
round abuse of power or mala fide exercise of power. It may arise
due to overstepping the limits of power or defeating the provision
of statute by adopting subterfuge or the power may be exercised
for extraneous or irrelevant considerations. The colour of fraud in
public law or administrative law, as it is developing, is assuming
different shades. It arises from a deception committed by
disclosure of incorrect facts knowingly and deliberately to invoke
exercise of power and procure an order from an authority or
tribunal. It must result in exercise of jurisdiction which otherwise
would not have been exercised. That is misrepresentation must be
in relation to the conditions provided in a section on existence or
non-existence of which power can be exercised. But nondisclosure of a fact not required by a statute to be disclosed may
not amount to fraud. Even in commercial transactions nondisclosure of every fact does not vitiate the agreement. “In a
contract every person must look for himself and ensures that he
acquires the information necessary to avoid bad bargain.”

10 (1983) 1 All ER 765
11 (1991) 1 SCC 556

[Anson's Law of Contract] In public law the duty is not to deceive.
For instance non-disclosure of any reason in the application under
Section 21 of the Act about its need after expiry of period or
failure to give reason that the premises shall be required by son,
daughter or any other family member does not result in
misrepresentation or fraud. It is not misrepresentation under
Section 21 to state that the premises shall be needed by the
landlord after expiry of the lease even though the premises in
occupation of the landlord on the date of application or, after
expiry of period were or may be sufficient. A non-disclosure of
fact which is not required by law to be disclosed does not amount
to misrepresentation. Section 21 does not place any positive or
comprehensive duty on the landlord to disclose any fact except that
he did not need the premises for the specified period. Even the
Controller is not obliged with a pro-active duty to investigate.
Silence or non-disclosure of facts not required by law to be
disclosed does not amount to misrepresentation. Even in contracts
it is excluded as is clear from explanation to Section 17 unless it
relates to fact which is likely to affect willingness of a person to
enter into a contract. Fraud or misrepresentation resulting in
vitiation of permission in context of Section 21 therefore could
mean disclosure of false facts but for which the Controller would
not have exercised jurisdiction.”
(Emphasis supplied)
State of Maharashtra v Dr. Budhikota Subbarao12 defines “fraud”
as “false representation by one who is aware that it was untrue with
an intention to mislead the other who may act upon it to his prejudice
and to the advantage of the representor”.
15. In the present case, clearly, the respondent cannot be held to be
guilty of any fraud as would enable the Court to close its eyes to the
delay of 780 days in instituting the present appeal. The error in the
“certificate of non-starter report”, assuming was an error, was by the
DLSA, and not by the respondent. There is, thankfully, no allegation
of collusion between the respondent and the DLSA – as, indeed, there
cannot be.

12 (1993) 2 SCC 567

16. In fact, the primary ground advanced in the present application,
for condonation of delay, is not of fraud on the respondent’s part, but
that there was negligence on the part of the Counsel appearing for the
appellants in prosecuting the matter.
17. This aspect stands covered by the recent decision of the
Supreme Court in Rajneesh Kumar v Ved Prakash13 as well as by a
judgment of a Coordinate Bench of this Court, authored incidentally
by one of us (C. Hari Shankar, J.) in Rahul Mavai v UOI14. The
relevant paragraphs of the said decisions may be reproduced thus:
From Rajneesh Kumar
“10. It appears that the entire blame has been thrown on the head
of the advocate who was appearing for the petitioners in the trial
court. We have noticed over a period of time a tendency on the part
of the litigants to blame their lawyers of negligence and
carelessness in attending the proceedings before the court. Even if
we assume for a moment that the concerned lawyer was careless or
negligent, this, by itself, cannot be a ground to condone long and
inordinate delay as the litigant owes a duty to be vigilant of his own
rights and is expected to be equally vigilant about the judicial
proceedings pending in the court initiated at his instance. The
litigant, therefore, should not be permitted to throw the entire
blame on the head of the advocate and thereby disown him at any
time and seek relief.”
From Rahul Mavai
“3. The explanation in para 4 of the writ petition can hardly
explain six years of delay in approaching the Court.
4. We also disapprove the unwholesome practice of seeking to
explain away inordinate delay and laches on approaching the Court
on the mere ground that the Counsel who had been dealing with, or
entrusted, the matter, was tardy, negligent, or indolent. At times,
this assertion is sought to be supported by an assertion that the

13 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3380
14 2024 SCC OnLine Del 9050

litigant has approached the Bar Council concerned against the
counsel.
5. We emphatically disapprove of this practice of shifting, to
the shoulders of the Counsel, the negligence in approaching the
Court. It is easy, in such circumstances, to file a complaint before
the Bar Council and seek to explain away the delay. We deprecate
this. A litigant does not abandon all responsibility to keep track of a
matter, once it is entrusted to Counsel.
6. That said, if, in fact, the Counsel has been negligent, the
litigant would have to place, on record, material to indicate that
she, or he, has been in touch with the Counsel during the entire
period of delay, and that the Counsel has been misleading her, or
him. This material must be acceptable, and convincing. The Court
has to be satisfied that, in fact, the Counsel has been misleading the
client, and that this explains the entire period of delay in
approaching the Court. Of course, if the Court is so satisfied, and
an innocent litigant has been led up the garden path by an
unscrupulous Counsel, the court would not allow injustice to be
done, and would, in an appropriate case, condone the delay.”
18. Mere allegations of laxity on the part of Counsel, therefore,
cannot constitute a legitimate basis to condone a delay as inordinate as
780 days, especially in a commercial matter.
19. No other ground for condonation of delay having been
advanced, we are constrained to hold that there is no sufficient cause
to condone the delay in instituting the present appeal.
20. The application for condonation of delay is dismissed.
RFA(COMM) 331/2025, CM APPL. 34907/2025 & CM APPL.
34908/2025
21. In view of the dismissal of the application for condonation of
delay, the appeal as well as the other applications filed within would

also be dismissed on the ground of delay without going into the
merits.
22. Needless to say, as we are not entertaining the appeal, any
amount deposited by the appellants would be returned to the
appellants