COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: 10/2025
DATE: 04.12.2025
PLAINTIFF: Vivek Kumar Mishra & Ors.
DEFENDENT: M/s Karyan Global LLP & Ors.
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Amit Mahajan

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. The present revision petition is filed challenging the order dated
24.12.2024 (hereafter ‘impugned order’), passed by the learned
District Judge, South East District, Saket Court, New Delhi in CS No.
3503/24.
2. Application filed by the petitioner (Defendant No.1) seeking
rejection of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (‘CPC’) was dismissed by the impugned order.
3. The brief facts of the case are as follows:
3.1. The subject suit, being CS No. 3503/2024, is filed by the
plaintiffs/ Respondent Nos.1 to 3 seeking declaration of certain
documents as non est, null and void claiming that the said documents
bore the forged signatures of the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs also sought a
decree of permanent injunction restraining the defendants (that is, the
petitioner and Respondent Nos. 4 to 11) from acting upon the subject
documents. The impugned documents, as mentioned in Clause A of
the prayer in the suit, are as under:
i. Document titled as “Shareholders Agreement” dated 30th July
2020;
ii. Form No. SH-1 dated 20th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Nitin Katiyar (Plaintiff No.3) & Mr. Vikash
Kumar Mishra (Plaintiff No.2) [Distinctive Number 10001 to
36520 – Corresponding Certificate No. 11 and registered folio
iii. Form No. SH-4 dated 30th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Nitin Katiyar & Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra
[Distinctive Number 10001 to 36520 – Corresponding
Certificate No. 11 and registered folio number 01];
iv. Form No. SH-1 dated 20th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Vivek Kumar Mishra (Plaintiff No.1) & Mr.
Vikash Kumar Mishra [Distinctive Number 11001 to 136520 –
Corresponding Certificate No. 13 and registered folio number
02]
v. Form No. SH-4 dated 30th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Vivek Kumar Mishra & Mr. Vikash Kumar
Mishra [Distinctive Number 11001 to 136520 – Corresponding
Certificate No. 13 and registered folio number 02]
vi. Form No. SH-1 dated 20th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra and Mr. Sujeet Jha
[Distinctive Number 210001 to 269670 – Corresponding
Certificate No. 15 and registered folio number 03]
vii. Form No. SH-4 dated 30th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra and Mr. Sujeet Jha
[Distinctive Number 210001 to 269670 – Corresponding
Certificate No. 15 and registered folio number 03]
viii. Form No. SH-1 dated 20th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra and Mr. Sujeet Jha
[Distinctive Number 434401 to 454290 – Corresponding
Certificate No. 17 and registered folio number 05]
ix. Form No. SH-4 dated 30th July, 2020 which bears the forged
signatures of Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra and Mr. Sujeet Jha
[Distinctive Number 434401 to 454290 – Corresponding
Certificate No. 17 and registered folio number 05]
x. Undated Receipts for consideration bearing forged signature of
Mr. Vivek Kumar Mishra; Mr. Nitin Katiyar; Mr. Sujeet Jha
and Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra.
xi. Board Resolution of the Raphe (Respondent No.4/ Defendant
No.9) dated 03rd September, 2020 approving transfer of shares
bearing forged signatures of Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra and
xii. Board Resolution of the Raph dated 16th July, 2020 for
approval of split of share certificate No. 04, 05, 09 and 10
bearing forged signatures of Mr. Vikash Kumar Mishra and
Mr. Nitin Katiyar.
3.2. It is the case of the plaintiffs that they are the founders of
Respondent No.4 company (Defendant No. 9), which is a research-led,
high-tech startup focused on designing, developing and manufacturing
world class Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) for the defence forces of
India. It is claimed that in the year 2019, Respondent No. 4 company
was in dire need of funds for making the required products for the
final phase of a competition, when Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were
introduced to Respondent No.5 (partner of the petitioner firm)/
Defendant No.2). Respondent No.5 agreed to extend loans for the
aforesaid purpose and proposed to do the same from his and his wife’s
(Respondent No.6/ Defendant No.3) account.
3.3. It is claimed that two loan agreements were executed for the
said purpose between Respondent No.4 company and Respondent
Nos. 5 and 6 respectively. Two conditions were laid down for
providing loans, that is, 26% of equity shares of Respondent No.4
company would be pledged to the petitioner firm, where Respondent
Nos. 5 and 6 were the only two partners, and Respondent Nos. 5 and 6
would be made Directors in Respondent No.4 company to ensure that
the extended loan is in compliance with the Companies Act, 2013. As
per the plaintiffs, they were made to believe that the paperwork for the
Chartered Accountant) team and the same would be discharged after
repayment of loan.
3.4. It is claimed that thereafter Respondent No.6 started getting
involved in the work of Respondent No.4 company and Respondent
No.5 regularly initiated discussions on his interest to acquire some
equity in the said company by way of a secondary sale, however, the
parties were unable to reach a consensus on the valuation of the
company. Loans totalling to ₹12,70,73,000/- were received from the
petitioner firm’s account by Respondent No. 4 company.
3.5. It is claimed that on 07.01.2022, without the knowledge of the
plaintiffs, Respondent No. 6 tendered her resignation and a fabricated
Board resolution was issued to this effect under the forged letter head
of Respondent No. 4 company under signatures of Respondent No.5.
By way of the same forged and fabricated Board Resolution,
Respondent No. 5 appointed one Sahil Sadhna as Additional Director
of Respondent No.4 company with effect from 07.01.2022. The
plaintiffs learnt of the fraudulent act on 16.02.2022, but due to loan
liabilities, they were unable to take any action and had no choice but
to reflect the changes in this regard in the Annual Report of
Respondent No.4 company.
3.6. Although settlement of debt was delayed, the entire loan
amount is claimed to have been repaid by 04.09.2024, and discussions
were allegedly underway for calculation of interest. Soon after the
firm before the learned National Company Law Tribunal, Allahabad
(‘NCLT’) for oppression and mismanagement in Respondent No.4
company, and an ex-parte order dated 07.11.2024 has been passed
restraining Respondent No. 4 company from making any changes in
constitution of board without leave of the learned Tribunal. It is
claimed that upon perusal of the petition, it was found that the
defendants had set out a fraudulent narrative around the loan
transactions and falsely claimed that the loan amount was actually
consideration for the shares of Respondent No. 4 company and a
Shareholders Agreement dated 30.07.2020 (hereafter ‘the
Shareholders Agreement’) had been executed to this effect. Reliance
was found to be placed on certain other documents purportedly signed
by the plaintiffs whereby the transfer of shares was allegedly
approved. It is claimed that the signatures of the plaintiffs on the
documents in question are forged.
3.7. It is claimed that the defendants colluded to create ante dated
and forged Shareholders Agreement as well as other documents like
board resolutions and security transfer forms, which have been
challenged in the suit, for the purpose of misusing the same to
undermine the operations of Respondent No.4 company and create
third party rights. A police complaint was also made by the plaintiffs
to this effect.
3.8. The petitioner firm filed an application under Order VII Rule 11
jurisdiction to entertain the plaint in view of the bar under Section 430
of the Companies Act, 2013 as the learned NCLT has already assumed
jurisdiction over the matter; the plaintiff’s are guilty of forum
shopping as they are seeking reliefs that overlap with the matter
pending before the learned NCLT and the suit is without any cause of
action; the suit is barred by law; the plaintiffs have suppressed
material facts; the plaint is grossly undervalued and the Court lacks
pecuniary jurisdiction to entertain the plaint.
3.9. By the impugned order, the learned Trial Court rejected the
grounds agitated by the petitioner firm and found that the objections
could be considered at the time of framing of issues. It was observed
that as the plaintiffs’ claim is primarily in relation to the issue of
forgery of signatures and not for enforcement of any right or
obligation, the dispute cannot qualify as a commercial dispute and the
same falls under the jurisdiction of the Civil Court. It was further
observed that as the suit essentially pertains to a dispute about the
validity of documents, the same was not hit by the bar under Section
430 of the Companies Act, 2013 as learned NCLT has no jurisdiction
to declare documents as forged and only Civil Court has jurisdiction to
decide issues of fraud. It was observed that not seeking cancellation of
documents was not fatal to the maintainability of the suit as the
plaintiffs had not admitted to the execution of the documents. The
objections to maintainability on account of Section 41(b) of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963 as well as forum shopping were also found
valued and the objections in relation to suppression of fact as well as
limitation could not be adjudicated while adjudicating the application
under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC.
3.10. Aggrieved by the impugned order, the petitioner has filed the
present petition.
4. Extensive arguments were heard on behalf of the petitioner firm
as well as the contesting respondents. Written submissions as well as
compilations of relied upon judgments were also handed over in Court
to endorse the submissions.
4.1. The matter was reserved for orders on 25.04.2025, whereafter,
an application was filed on behalf of the petitioner seeking
consideration of the judgment passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in
the case of Shailja Krishna v. Satori Global Ltd. : 2025 SCC OnLine
SC 1889, which apparently had a direct bearing on the issues involved
in the present case. Pursuant to the same, the matter was taken up for
arguments again on 24.09.2025, 26.09.2025, 09.10.2025 and
16.10.2025, when it was reserved again.
5. The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
impugned order is bad in law as the objections raised by the petitioner
have been summarily dismissed without proper application of mind
which is against the principles of natural justice.
6. They submitted that the learned District Judge has committed a
to forgery cannot be adjudicated by the learned NCLT, completely
ignoring the specialized jurisdiction and wide powers conferred upon
the learned NCLT.
7. They relied upon Rules 39, 43 and 70 of the NCLT Rules, 2016
to contend that the NCLT is empowered to examine the issue of
forgery and fabrication of documents. They submitted that the fact that
the proceedings are pending before the learned NCLT and the
plaintiffs are participating in the proceedings without jurisdictional
objection makes the bar under Section 430 of the Companies Act,
2013 absolute. They submitted that mere allegation of forgery cannot
divest the learned NCLT of its jurisdiction and placed reliance on the
following judgments to endorse that the learned NCLT is empowered
to look into the issue of forgery:
i. Chalasani Udaya Shankar v. Lexus Technologies (P) Ltd. :
(2024) 10 SCC 303;
ii. Kavita Arora v. Leptons Designtek (P) Ltd. : (2024) 247
Comp Cas 167;
iii. SAS Hospitality (P) Ltd. v. Surya Constructions : (2019)
212 Comp Cas 102; and
iv. Channel Foods (P) Ltd. v. A.K. Nowshad : 2022 SCC
OnLine NCLAT 4443.
8. They further submitted that the subject suit is filed on identical
grounds which have been raised by the plaintiffs before the learned
NCLT, and the plaintiffs have also filed a criminal complaint which
9. They submitted that it is settled law that the proper valuation of
a plaint goes to the root of the matter and the documentary evidence
and the pleadings clearly show the transaction value of ₹20 crores
against the artificial valuation of ₹13.26 lakhs. They submitted that the
valuation of the suit is arbitrary and the same does not reflect the real
value of the relief sought by the plaintiffs. They submitted that despite
the same, the learned District Judge has relegated the matter to trial
even though the matter is clearly beyond the pecuniary jurisdiction of
the Court.
10. They further submitted that even otherwise, the present dispute
is manifestly commercial in nature and the learned District Judge has
erred in interpreting the scope of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 by
observing that the dispute must primarily relate to commercial
transactions rather than questions of validity of commercial documents
to qualify as commercial in nature. They submitted that merely
because forgery is alleged, the same cannot take the dispute outside
the purview of Commercial Courts when the underlying transactions
are commercial in nature. Reliance was placed on the following
judgments:
i. Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. v. General Electric Co. : (1984)
4 SCC 679;
ii. TV Today Network Ltd. v. News Laundry Media (P) Ltd. :
(2022) 5 HCC (Del) 6;
iii. Modi Stratford Enterprise Management (P) Ltd. v. Punjab
iv. Amanpreet Kohli v. Pankaj Dayal : 2023 SCC OnLine Del
1808
11. Per contra, the learned counsel for the plaintiffs contested that
the present petition is liable to be dismissed as the learned District
Judge committed no error of jurisdiction or material irregularity so as
to warrant interference in revisional jurisdiction.
12. They submitted that the issue of forgery cannot be adjudicated
by the learned NCLT or any other forum which exercises summary
jurisdiction and the jurisdiction to decide complex issues of facts and
law as well as allegations of fraud and forgery continue to remain with
the Civil Court. They submitted that certain documents annexed with
the plaint, including the Forensic Examination Report dated
26.11.2024, will have to be examined through a thorough trial. They
submitted that there is no provision under the Companies Act, 2013
which vests the learned NCLT with the jurisdiction to grant the relief
as prayed for in the subject suit. They further submitted that the draft
of the Shareholders Agreement was shared with the defendants
through email after the purported execution of the said agreement
which clearly shows that the agreement is forged and the dispute in
relation to veracity of the same cannot be looked into by the learned
NCLT. They relied upon the following judgments in this regard:
i. Ammonia Supplies Corpn. (P) Ltd. v. Modern Plastic
Containers (P) Ltd. : (1998) 7 SCC 105;
ii. Jai Mahal Hotels (P) Ltd. v. Devraj Singh : (2016) 1 SCC
iii. Sita Chaudhry v. Verinder Singh : 2022 SCC OnLine Del
2235;
iv. Shazia Rehman v. Anwar Elahi : 2023 SCC OnLine Del
4807;
v. Morgan Securities and Credits Pvt. Ltd. v. BPL Limited &
Ors. : 2023 SCC OnLine Del 119.
13. They submitted that the reliance on Rule 43 of the NCLT Rules,
2016 is misplaced as the same pertains to power of the Tribunal to call
for further information or evidence in relation to fabrication of any
statutory records. They submitted that the forged documents in the
present case have not become part of the statutory records of
Respondent No.4 company.
14. They submitted that the plaintiffs have availed their remedies in
accordance with law and institution of the civil suit as well as lodging
of the criminal complaint cannot be construed to be forum shopping.
15. They submitted that the valuation of the suit is based on Recital
H of the Shareholders Agreement and as the suit does not relate to
performance or non-performance of the said agreement but rather
relates to the validity of the same, the valuation is reasonable and
adequate. They further submitted that there is no prayer in regard to
the prior loan transaction and the cause of action is the forgery done
by the petitioner firm in connivance with the other defendants,
whereby the prior transaction’s value is of no relevance to evaluate the
16. They submitted that as the existence of the Shareholders
Agreement itself has been denied and since the plaintiffs are not
seeking any relief out of the said agreement, the dispute cannot be
assessed to be a “commercial dispute” in terms of the Commercial
Courts Act, 2015. They submitted that the nature of the dispute can
only be ascertained after the adjudication on the validity of agreement.
Reliance was placed on the following judgment in the case of Ambalal
Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. v. K.S. Infraspace LLP: (2020) 15 SCC
585 and Lord Grih Nirman Pvt. Ltd. v. Merlin Projects : APOT
225/2024 (Division Bench of Calcutta High Court).
17. They further relied upon the judgment in the case of IHHR
Hospitality (Andhra) (P) Ltd. v. Seema Swami : 2022 SCC OnLine
Del 3636 to contend that for a dispute to qualify as a commercial
dispute, the same has to be in the ordinary course of business by the
named class of persons. They submitted that even if the Shareholders
Agreement is considered to be validly executed, considering that
neither the petitioner firm nor the defendants are in the business of
providing loans, the dispute arising from the agreement cannot be
classified as a “commercial dispute”.
18. They submitted that the objective of the Commercial Courts
Act, 2015 cannot be achieved if commercial courts are saddled with
the task of ascertaining the very existence of a document which forms
the basis of the dispute. They submitted that even if it is found that the
plaint and the plaint will need to be returned in such circumstances.
19. The learned counsel for Respondent No.4 company supported
the arguments advanced on behalf the plaintiffs.
ANALYSIS
20. At the outset, it is relevant to note that the petitioner has
challenged the impugned order by invoking the revisional jurisdiction
of this Court. It is trite law that the scope of revision under Section
115 of the CPC is very limited and is to be exercised only if the
subordinate Court appears to have exceeded its jurisdiction or to have
failed to exercise its jurisdiction, or if the subordinate Court has
exercised its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity.
LAW IN RELATION TO ORDER VII Rule 11 OF THE CPC
21. The law in relation to rejection of plaint under Order VII Rule
11 of the CPC is well settled. The said Rule provides for summary
dismissal of a suit at the threshold, before the parties have led their
evidence, if one of the grounds stipulated therein is made out. The
purpose of the said provision is to stifle sham civil actions and quell
bogus and meaningless suits at the outset when the said suits ex facie
appear to be an abuse of the process of law, without further wasting
judicial time.
22. Considering that the power to terminate the action without even
drastic one, the Court is required to limit itself to discerning whether
the plaint prima facie discloses a cause of action by perusing the
substance of the averments, without paying any heed to the pleas taken
in the written statement. While the Court is not precluded from
intervening when the litigation is manifestly vexatious, at the same
time, if a prima facie case is made out, it is not open to the Court to
conduct an enquiry into the merit or trustworthiness of the allegations.
The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Dahiben Vs. Arvinbhai
Kalyanji Bhansai : (2020) 7 SCC 366 has succinctly discussed the
law in relation to Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC. The relevant portion
of the same is reproduced hereunder:
“23. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties, perused
the plaint and documents filed therewith, as also the written
submissions filed on behalf of the parties.
xxx
23.2. The remedy under Order 7 Rule 11 is an independent and
special remedy, wherein the court is empowered to summarily
dismiss a suit at the threshold, without proceeding to record
evidence, and conducting a trial, on the basis of the evidence
adduced, if it is satisfied that the action should be terminated on
any of the grounds contained in this provision.
23.3. The underlying object of Order 7 Rule 11(a) is that if in a
suit, no cause of action is disclosed, or the suit is barred by
limitation under Rule 11(d), the court would not permit the plaintiff
to unnecessarily protract the proceedings in the suit. In such a
case, it would be necessary to put an end to the sham litigation, so
23.4. In Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi, 1986 Supp SCC 315, this
Court held that the whole purpose of conferment of powers under
this provision is to ensure that a litigation which is meaningless,
and bound to prove abortive, should not be permitted to waste
judicial time of the court....
23.5. The power conferred on the court to terminate a civil action
is, however, a drastic one, and the conditions enumerated in
Order 7 Rule 11 are required to be strictly adhered to.
23.6. Under Order 7 Rule 11, a duty is cast on the court to
determine whether the plaint discloses a cause of action by
scrutinising the averments in the plaint [Liverpool & London S.P.
& I Assn. Ltd. v. M.V. Sea Success I, (2004) 9 SCC 512], read in
conjunction with the documents relied upon, or whether the suit is
barred by any law.
xxx
23.9. In exercise of power under this provision, the court would
determine if the assertions made in the plaint are contrary to
statutory law, or judicial dicta, for deciding whether a case for
rejecting the plaint at the threshold is made out.
23.10. At this stage, the pleas taken by the defendant in the written
statement and application for rejection of the plaint on the merits,
would be irrelevant, and cannot be adverted to, or taken into
consideration. [Sopan Sukhdeo Sable v. Charity Commr., (2004) 3
SCC 137]
23.11. The test for exercising the power under Order 7 Rule 11 is
that if the averments made in the plaint are taken in entirety, in
conjunction with the documents relied upon, would the same
23.12. In Hardesh Ores (P) Ltd. v. Hede & Co. [Hardesh Ores (P)
Ltd. v. Hede & Co., (2007) 5 SCC 614] the Court further held that
it is not permissible to cull out a sentence or a passage, and to read
it in isolation. It is the substance, and not merely the form, which
has to be looked into. The plaint has to be construed as it stands,
without addition or subtraction of words. If the allegations in the
plaint prima facie show a cause of action, the court cannot
embark upon an enquiry whether the allegations are true in
fact. D. Ramachandran v. R.V. Janakiraman, (1999) 3 SCC 267;
See also Vijay Pratap Singh v. Dukh Haran Nath Singh, AIR 1962
SC 941].
23.13. If on a meaningful reading of the plaint, it is found that
the suit is manifestly vexatious and without any merit, and does
not disclose a right to sue, the court would be justified in
exercising the power under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC.
23.14. The power under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC may be exercised by
the court at any stage of the suit, either before registering the
plaint, or after issuing summons to the defendant, or before
conclusion of the trial, as held by this Court in the judgment
of Saleem Bhai v. State of Maharashtra, (2003) 1 SCC 557. The
plea that once issues are framed, the matter must necessarily go to
trial was repelled by this Court in Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv
Gandhi, 1986 Supp SCC 315. Followed in Manvendrasinhji
Ranjitsinhji Jadeja v. Vijaykunverba, 1998 SCC OnLine Guj
281 : (1998) 2 GLH 823.
23.15. The provision of Order 7 Rule 11 is mandatory in nature. It
states that the plaint “shall” be rejected if any of the grounds
specified in clauses (a) to (e) are made out. If the court finds that
the plaint does not disclose a cause of action, or that the suit is
barred by any law, the court has no option, but to reject the
plaint.”
23. The maintainability of suits such as this one, which are filed in
Civil Courts (under the Specific Relief Act, 1963 or the CPC) seeking
declaratory relief on the aspect of forgery or invalidity of documents
(e.g., share transfers, agreements, or company records), in response to
ongoing or related NCLT proceedings under Companies Act, 2013
(such as for oppression and mismanagement under Sections 241-242
of the Companies Act, 2013), are to be thus tested at the threshold
under Order VII Rule 11(d) of the CPC. This provision allows
rejection of the plaint if it appears “barred by law”, including, by
invoking the clauses pertaining to ouster of subject matter jurisdiction.
24. Although the petitioner had agitated a number of grounds in its
application under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC, the impugned order
has been assailed before this Court on essentially three grounds– the
suit could not be entertained by a Civil Court on account of the bar
under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013; even if the suit is
found to be maintainable, the same pertains to a commercial dispute in
terms of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015; and the plaint is miserably
undervalued.
BAR UNDER SECTION 430 OF THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
25. This Court deems it apposite to first consider the issue of the
bar under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 as the same goes to
26. As noted above, the petitioner has initiated a petition before the
learned NCLT alleging oppression and mismanagement against
Respondent No.4 company and others (including the plaintiffs) under
Sections 59, 241 and 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 (“Companies
Act”). It was only thereafter that Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 filed the civil
suit for declaration of the share title documentation, including the
Shareholders Agreement dated 30.07.2020 as well as the securities
transfer forms and certain Board Resolutions, as non-est, null and void
on account of the same bearing their forged signatures.
27. It is argued that the present dispute fundamentally arises from a
corporate transaction involving share transfers, board appointments
and related corporate actions which squarely fall within the
jurisdiction of the learned NCLT, and without awaiting the
determination on the said issues in the petition instituted by the
petitioner firm, the subject suit has been filed which amounts to forum
shopping. It is further argued that the same is in teeth of the bar
stipulated under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 which bars
the jurisdiction of civil court to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which the Tribunal is empowered to determine.
28. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the allegations in the present
case cannot be adjudicated by NCLT or any forum which exercises
summary jurisdiction as the same relates to complex issues of fact, and
it has been rightly held by the learned Trial Court that matters of fraud
contested on behalf of the petitioner and it is asserted that such issues
of fabrication and forgery squarely lie within the jurisdiction of
NCLT.
Relevant statutory provisions and Rules
29. Before delving into the facts of the case to adjudicate the said
objection, it is pertinent to first take note of certain provisions of the
Companies Act, 2013 which are relevant for deciding the issue at
hand. The same are set out below:
“241. Application to Tribunal for relief in cases of oppression,
etc.—(1) Any member of a company who complains that—
(a) the affairs of the company have been or are being
conducted in a manner prejudicial to public interest or in a
manner prejudicial or oppressive to him or any other
member or members or in a manner prejudicial to the
interests of the company; or
(b) the material change, not being a change brought about
by, or in the interests of, any creditors, including debenture
holders or any class of shareholders of the company, has
taken place in the management or control of the company,
whether by an alteration in the Board of Directors, or
manager, or in the ownership of the company's shares, or if
it has no share capital, in its membership, or in any other
manner whatsoever, and that by reason of such change, it is
likely that the affairs of the company will be conducted in a
manner prejudicial to its interests or its members or any
class of members,
may apply to the Tribunal, provided such member has a right to
apply under Section 244, for an order under this Chapter.
(2) The Central Government, if it is of the opinion that the affairs
of the company are being conducted in a manner prejudicial to
public interest, it may itself apply to the Tribunal for an order
Provided that the applications under this sub-section, in respect of
such company or class of companies, as may be prescribed, shall
be made before the Principal Bench of the Tribunal which shall be
dealt with by such Bench.
(3) Where in the opinion of the Central Government there exist
circumstances suggesting that—
(a) any person concerned in the conduct and management
of the affairs of a company is or has been in connection
therewith guilty of fraud, misfeasance, persistent
negligence or default in carrying out his obligations and
functions under the law or of breach of trust;
(b) the business of a company is not or has not been
conducted and managed by such person in accordance with
sound business principles or prudent commercial practices;
(c) a company is or has been conducted and managed by
such person in a manner which is likely to cause, or has
caused, serious injury or damage to the interest of the
trade, industry or business to which such company
pertains; or
(d) the business of a company is or has been conducted and
managed by such person with intent to defraud its creditors,
members or any other person or otherwise for a fraudulent
or unlawful purpose or in a manner prejudicial to public
interest,
the Central Government may initiate a case against such person
and refer the same to the Tribunal with a request that the Tribunal
may inquire into the case and record a decision as to whether or
not such person is a fit and proper person to hold the office of
director or any other office connected with the conduct and
management of any company.
(4) The person against whom a case is referred to the Tribunal
under sub-section (3), shall be joined as a respondent to the
application.
(a) shall contain a concise statement of such circumstances
and materials as the Central Government may consider
necessary for the purposes of the inquiry; and
(b) shall be signed and verified in the manner laid down in
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the
signature and verification of a plaint in a suit by the
Central Government.
242. Powers of Tribunal.—(1) If, on any application made under
Section 241, the Tribunal is of the opinion—
(a) that the company's affairs have been or are being
conducted in a manner prejudicial or oppressive to any
member or members or prejudicial to public interest or in a
manner prejudicial to the interests of the company; and
(b) that to wind up the company would unfairly prejudice
such member or members, but that otherwise the facts
would justify the making of a winding-up order on the
ground that it was just and equitable that the company
should be wound up,
the Tribunal may, with a view to bringing to an end the matters
complained of, make such order as it thinks fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers under sub-
section (1), an order under that sub-section may provide for—
(a) the regulation of conduct of affairs of the company in
future;
(b) the purchase of shares or interests of any members of
the company by other members thereof or by the company;
(c) in the case of a purchase of its shares by the company as
aforesaid, the consequent reduction of its share capital;
(d) restrictions on the transfer or allotment of the shares
of the company;
(e) the termination, setting aside or modification, of any
and the managing director, any other director or
manager, upon such terms and conditions as may, in the
opinion of the Tribunal, be just and equitable in the
circumstances of the case;
(f) the termination, setting aside or modification of any
agreement between the company and any person other
than those referred to in clause (e):
Provided that no such agreement shall be terminated, set
aside or modified except after due notice and after
obtaining the consent of the party concerned;
(g) the setting aside of any transfer, delivery of goods,
payment, execution or other act relating to property made
or done by or against the company within three months
before the date of the application under this section, which
would, if made or done by or against an individual, be
deemed in his insolvency to be a fraudulent preference;
(h) removal of the managing director, manager or any of
the directors of the company;
(i) recovery of undue gains made by any managing director,
manager or director during the period of his appointment
as such and the manner of utilisation of the recovery
including transfer to Investor Education and Protection
Fund or repayment to identifiable victims;
(j) the manner in which the managing director or manager
of the company may be appointed subsequent to an order
removing the existing managing director or manager of the
company made under clause (h);
(k) appointment of such number of persons as directors,
who may be required by the Tribunal to report to the
Tribunal on such matters as the Tribunal may direct;
(l) imposition of costs as may be deemed fit by the Tribunal;
(m) any other matter for which, in the opinion of the
Tribunal, it is just and equitable that provision should be
(3) A certified copy of the order of the Tribunal under sub-section
(1) shall be filed by the company with the Registrar within thirty
days of the order of the Tribunal.
(4) The Tribunal may, on the application of any party to the
proceeding, make any interim order which it thinks fit for
regulating the conduct of the company's affairs upon such terms
and conditions as appear to it to be just and equitable.
(4-A) At the conclusion of the hearing of the case in respect of sub-
section (3) of Section 241, the Tribunal shall record its decision
stating therein specifically as to whether or not the respondent is a
fit and proper person to hold the office of director or any other
office connected with the conduct and management of any
company.
(5) Where an order of the Tribunal under sub-section (1) makes
any alteration in the memorandum or articles of a company, then,
notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the company shall
not have power, except to the extent, if any, permitted in the order,
to make, without the leave of the Tribunal, any alteration
whatsoever which is inconsistent with the order, either in the
memorandum or in the articles.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the alterations
made by the order in the memorandum or articles of a company
shall, in all respects, have the same effect as if they had been duly
made by the company in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and the said provisions shall apply accordingly to the
memorandum or articles so altered.
(7) A certified copy of every order altering, or giving leave to alter,
a company's memorandum or articles, shall within thirty days after
the making thereof, be filed by the company with the Registrar who
shall register the same.
(8) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (5), the
company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than
one lakh rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees
and every officer of the company who is in default shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
430. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.—No civil court shall have
jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any
matter which the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal is
empowered to determine by or under this Act or any other law for
the time being in force and no injunction shall be granted by any
court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act or
any other law for the time being in force, by the Tribunal or the
Appellate Tribunal.”
30. The petitioner has also placed reliance on certain rules to
endorse its contention that NCLT is empowered to adjudicate such
issues of fraud, whereby this Court considers it apposite to also take
note of the relevant rules in NCLT Rules, 2016 which stipulate the
powers of the Tribunal. The same are set out below:
“11. Inherent Powers.—Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to
limit or otherwise affect the inherent powers of the Tribunal to
make such orders as may be necessary for meeting the ends of
justice or to prevent abuse of the process of the Tribunal.
39. Production of Evidence by Affidavit.—(1) The Tribunal may
direct the parties to give evidence, if any, by affidavit.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), where the
Tribunal considers it necessary in the interest of natural justice, it
may order cross-examination of any deponent on the points of
conflict either through information and communication technology
facilities such as video conferencing or otherwise as may be
decided by the Tribunal, on an application moved by any party.
(3) Every affidavit to be filed before the Tribunal shall be in Form
No. NCLT. 7.
40. Production of additional evidence before the Bench.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 39, the parties to the
additional evidence, either oral or documentary, which was in the
possession or knowledge but was not produced before the
Inspector, appointed by the Central Government for the purpose of
investigating the affairs of the concerned company, during
investigation under Chapter XIV of the Act, but if the Bench
requires any additional evidence or document to be produced or
any witness to be examined or any affidavit to be filed to enable it
to pass orders or for any other substantial cause, or if the
Inspector so appointed for the said purpose has not given sufficient
opportunity to the party to adduce evidence, the Bench, for reasons
to be recorded, may allow such document to be produced or
witness to be examined or affidavit to be filed or may allow such
evidence to be produced.
(2) Such document may be produced or such witness examined or
such evidence adduced either before the Bench or before such
authority as the Bench may direct.
(3) If the document is directed to be produced or witness examined
or evidence adduced before any authority, the party shall comply
with the direction of the Bench and after compliance, send the
document, the record of the deposition of the witness or the record
of the evidence adduced, to the Bench.
(4) Additional evidence or document shall be made available by the
Bench to the parties to the proceedings other than the party
adducing the evidence and they shall be afforded an opportunity to
rebut the contents of the said additional evidence.
43. Power of the Bench to call for further information or
evidence.—(1) The Bench may, before passing orders on the
petition or application, require the parties or any one or more of
them, to produce such further documentary or other evidence as it
may consider necessary—
(a) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the truth of the
allegations made in the petition or application; or
(b) for ascertaining any information which, in the opinion of the
Bench, is necessary for the purpose of enabling it to pass orders in
the petition or application.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-rule (1), the Bench may, for the
purpose of inquiry or investigation, as the case may be, admit such
including e-mails, books of accounts, book or paper, written
communications, statements, contracts, electronic certificates and
such other similar mode of transactions as may legally be
permitted to take into account of those as admissible as evidence
under the relevant laws.
(3) Where any party preferring or contesting a petition of
oppression and mismanagement raises the issue of forgery or
fabrication of any statutory records, then it shall be at liberty to
move an appropriate application for forensic examination and the
Bench hearing the matter may, for reasons to be recorded, either
allow the application and send the disputed records for opinion of
Central Forensic Science Laboratory at the cost of the party
alleging fabrication of records, or dismiss such application.
52. Summoning of witnesses and recording Evidence.—(1) If a
petition or an application is presented by any party to the
proceedings for summoning of witnesses, the Tribunal shall issue
summons for the appearance of such witnesses unless it considers
that their appearance is not necessary for the just decision of the
case.
(2) Where summons are issued by the Tribunal under sub-rule (1)
to any witness to give evidence or to produce any document, the
person so summoned shall be entitled to such travelling and daily
allowance sufficient to defray the travelling and other expenses as
may be determined by the Registrar which shall be deposited by the
party as decided by the Registrar.
146. Disposal of Cases.—On receipt of an application, petition,
appeal etc, the Tribunal, after giving the parties a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks
fit:
Provided that the Tribunal, after considering an appeal, may
summarily dismiss the same, for reasons to be recorded, if the
Tribunal is of opinion that there are no sufficient grounds for
31. From a bare perusal of the aforesaid provisions, it is apparent
that Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 imposes an absolute bar
on the jurisdiction of civil courts to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of “any matter” which the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal
is “empowered to determine” by or under the Companies Act or any
other law for the time being in force. Moreover, Section 242 of the
Companies Act, 2013 confers a broad and remedial jurisdiction on the
Tribunal to pass such an order as it thinks fit to bring to an end the
matters complained of.
32. It is also pertinent to note that Rule 11 of NCLT Rules, 2016
specifically provide that the Tribunal is vested with the inherent power
to make such orders as may be necessary for meeting the ends of
justice. Apart from the same, the Tribunal is vested with the power to
call the parties to give evidence by way of affidavit and order cross-
examination of deponent, if so required. The Tribunal can also call for
production of additional evidence as well as further information, and
summon witnesses for recording evidence. Rule 43 of the NCLT
Rules, 2016 specifically provides that where in a case of oppression
and mismanagement, either of the parties raise the issue of forgery or
fabrication of any statutory records, the Tribunal can send the
disputed records for opinion of CFSL for the purpose of satisfying
itself as to the truth of the allegations.
33. A conjoint reading of Sections 430, 241 and 242 of the
makes it apparent that the NCLT is empowered to adjudicate upon
matters of the widest possible amplitude as far as company matters are
concerned.
Relevant Judicial precedents
34. Both the sides have relied upon a catena of judgments in
support of their contentions. This Court considers it apposite to also
discuss the relevant precedents to render a determination of the issue
at hand.
34.1. In the case of Ammonia Supplies Corpn. (P) Ltd. v. Modern
Plastic Containers (P) Ltd. (supra), the Hon’ble Apex Court was met
with a case where the appellant company, which had been in
liquidation since the year 1962, had invested in 50% stake of the
respondent company in 1977. Purportedly, the investment was made
due to familial ties between the beneficiary of the appellant company
with the Managing Director of the respondent company. Disputes
erupted after the death of the Managing Director of the respondent
company, with his brothers denying the investment entirely and
contesting that the claim of the appellant company, if any, was time-
barred loan. Various documents relied upon by the appellant company
were also denied as forged. The dispute led to the appellant company
filing a composite petition under Sections 397 (Application to
Company Law Board for relief in cases of oppression), 398
(Application to Company Law Board for relief in cases of
which was dismissed in the year 1994 by the company judge holding
that the summary jurisdiction of the company court is unsuitable for
complex fraud/evidence issues, directing filing of a civil suit with
leave under Section 446(2) of the Companies Act, 1956. The order of
the company judge was affirmed by the Division Bench of the High
Court. The Hon’ble Supreme Court allowed the appeal against the
same, holding that Section 155 of the Companies Act, 1956 confers
summary and exclusive jurisdiction for register rectification, and
Company Court has wide exclusive discretion to adjudicate fraud
disputes itself, if such disputes are within the peripheral field of
rectification, or send the party to seek his relief before a Civil Court
for adjudication of some facts falling outside the purview of
rectification. It was noted that the deletion of proviso to Section 38 of
the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (which empowered the Company
Court to direct an issue to be tried in which any question of law may
be raised) in the subsequent act does not enable a party to lay claim of
many contentious issues for adjudication under the garb of
rectification. The matter was remitted for fresh consideration to the
High Court as it was felt that it would be appropriate for the Court to
assess as to whether the documents which were alleged to be forged,
were said to be so only to exclude the jurisdiction of the Court. The
relevant portion of the judgment is as under:
“25. Now we proceed to examine the power of the court to rectify
the Register of Members of a company under Section 155. The
question raised for the appellant is that the court under this Act
court under the Act having exclusive jurisdiction should decide
itself. In support, strong reliance is placed on the deletion of the
proviso to Section 38 of the 1913 Act. Section 38 of the old Act is
quoted hereunder:
“38. Power of the court to rectify Register.—
xxx
Provided that the court may direct an issue to be tried in which any
question of law may be raised; and an appeal from the decision on
such an issue shall lie in the manner directed by the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), on the grounds mentioned in Section
100 of that Code.”
26. The proviso gave discretion to the court to direct an issue of
law to be tried, if raised. By this deletion, submission is that the
Company Court now itself has to decide any question relating to
the rectification of the Register including the law and not to send
one to the civil court. There could be no doubt any question raised
within the peripheral field of rectification, it is the court under
Section 155 alone which would have exclusive jurisdiction.
However, the question raised does not rest here. In case any claim
is based on some seriously disputed civil rights or title, denial of
any transaction or any other basic facts which may be the
foundation to claim a right to be a member and if the court feels
such claim does not constitute to be a rectification but instead
seeking adjudication of basic pillar some such facts falling outside
the rectification, its discretion to send a party to seek his relief
before the civil court first for the adjudication of such facts, it
cannot be said such right of the court to have been taken away
merely on account of the deletion of the aforesaid proviso.
Otherwise under the garb of rectification one may lay claim of
many such contentious issues for adjudication not falling under it.
Thus in other words, the court under it has discretion to find
whether the dispute raised is really for rectification or is of such a
nature that unless decided first it would not come within the
purview of rectification...
xxx
31...There is nothing under the Companies Act expressly barring
“court” as defined under the Act exercising its powers under
various sections where it has been invested with exclusive
jurisdiction, the jurisdiction of the civil court is impliedly barred.
We have already held above the jurisdiction of the “court” under
Section 155, to the extent it has is exclusive, the jurisdiction of
the civil court is impliedly barred. For what is not covered as
aforesaid the civil court would have jurisdiction. Similarly we find
even under Section 446(1), its words itself indicate the jurisdiction
of the civil court is not excluded. This sub-section states, “... no
suit or legal proceedings shall be commenced ... or proceeded with
... except by leave of the court”. The words “except by leave of the
court” itself indicate on leave being given the civil court would
have jurisdiction to adjudicate one's right. Of course discretion to
exercise such power is with the “court”. Similarly under Section
446(2), “court” is vested with powers to entertain or dispose of
any suit or proceedings by or against the company. Once this
discretion is exercised to have it decided by it, it by virtue of the
language therein excludes the jurisdiction of the civil court. So
we conclude that the principle of law as decided by the High
Court that the jurisdiction of the court under Section 155 is
summary in nature cannot be faulted. Reverting to the second
limb of submission by learned counsel for the appellant that the
Court should not have directed for seeking permission to file a suit
only because a party for dispute's sake states that the dispute
raised is a complicated question of facts including fraud to be
adjudicated. The Court should have examined itself to see whether
even prima facie what is said is a complicated question or not.
Even dispute of fraud, if by a bare perusal of the document or
what is apparent on the face of it on comparison of any disputed
signature with that of the admitted signature the Court is able to
conclude no fraud, then it should proceed to decide the matter
and not reject it only because fraud is stated. Further on the other
hand learned counsel for the respondent totally denies any share
having been purchased by the appellant-Company or any amount
paid to it. No transfer of any such share was ever approved by the
Board of Directors. It is urged that the money even if advanced to
Shri V.K. Bhargava by the appellant-Company, if at all, was a
private transaction between the two with which the respondent-
Company has no concern. So we find there is total denial by the
respondent.
32. We have gone through the judgment of the High Court. It has
rightly held the law pertaining to the jurisdiction of the “court”
the appellant but concluded that since they are disputed and said to
be forged hence it directed for seeking leave if advised for suit. We
feel it would have been appropriate if the Court would have seen
for itself whether these documents are disputed and if any
document is alleged to be forged, whether it is said to be so only to
exclude the jurisdiction of the Court or it is genuinely so. Similarly
we feel appropriate that while deciding this the Court should take
into consideration the submissions for the respondents, whether it
would come within the scope of rectification or not in the light of
what we have said above.”
(emphasis supplied)
34.2. The dispute in Shashi Prakash Khemka v. NEPC Micon :
(2019) 18 SCC 569 arose from the proceedings under Section 111A of
the Companies Act, 1956 (which provided for rectification of register
on transfer) regarding the validity of share transfers, where the
Hon’ble High Court of Madras reversed the Company Law Board’s
favourable ruling for the appellants, effectively relegating them to a
civil suit remedy without invoking Order VII Rule 11(d) of the CPC or
explicitly applying Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 (the cause
of action in that case had arisen prior to this enactment). The
appellants argued that Section 59 of the Companies Act, 2013 (which
provides for rectification of registers) and Section 430 of the
Companies Act, 2013 bar civil jurisdiction in matters for which power
has been conferred upon NCLT. The Hon’ble Apex Court found that
the appropriate course of action would be to relegate the parties to the
remedy before NCLT rather than Civil Court. It was held that:
“5...The effect of the aforesaid provision is that in matters in
respect of which power has been conferred on NCLT, the
6. It is not in dispute that were a dispute to arise today, the civil
suit remedy would be completely barred and the power would be
vested with the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) under
Section 59 of the said Act. We are conscious of the fact that in the
present case, the cause of action has arisen at a stage prior to this
enactment. However, we are of the view that relegating the parties
to civil suit now would not be the appropriate remedy, especially
considering the manner in which Section 430 of the Act is widely
worded.
7. We are thus of the opinion that in view of the subsequent
developments, the appropriate course of action would be to
relegate the appellants to remedy before NCLT under the
Companies Act, 2013. In view of the lapse of time, we permit the
appellants to file a fresh petition within a maximum period of two
months from today.”
(emphasis supplied)
34.3. In the case of Chalasani Udaya Shankar and Ors. v. Lexus
Technologies Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. : (2024) 10 SCC 303, the appellants
therein had approached the NCLT by way of a company petition
seeking rectification of the register of members and to initiate action
for oppression and mismanagement, apart from criminal proceedings
for committing fraud. Shares were acquired by one of the respondents
via a share purchase agreement, pursuant to which, it was claimed that
the appellants acquired the said equity shares by way of securities
transfer deeds. It was claimed that share certificates were issued to the
appellants and consideration was paid towards acquisition of shares.
The petition for rectification was filed after the appellants found that
annual returns and financial statements were filed with false
information, erasing the shareholding of the appellants. The
appellants, and it was alleged that the appellants had forged certain
signatures on the share certificates. NCLT rejected the contentions of
the appellants and observed that it had no jurisdiction to try the
petition as it involved issues of fraud, etcetera. The appeal against the
order passed by NCLT was dismissed by NCLAT.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court restored the petition and observed that
both NCLT and NCLAT had erred in not examining as to whether the
issues raised by the respondents were mere moonshine. Relying on a
catena of judgments, including Ammonia Supplies Corpn. (P) Ltd. v.
Modern Plastic Containers (P) Ltd. (supra) and Jai Mahal Hotels (P)
Ltd. v. Devraj Singh : (2016) 1 SCC 423, it was observed that if an
open and shut case of fraud is made out involving issues truly relating
to “rectification”, NCLT/ Company Law Board would be entitled to
examine the same, and it is only complex questions of title which
would fall outside its jurisdiction. The relevant portion of the
judgment is reproduced hereunder:
“33. In Jai Mahal Hotels (P) Ltd. v. Devraj Singh [Jai Mahal
Hotels (P) Ltd. v. Devraj Singh, (2016) 1 SCC 423 : (2016) 1 SCC
(Civ) 354] , this Court again held that issues which truly relate to
“rectification” of the Register fall within the summary jurisdiction
of the Company Law Board and only complex questions of title
fall outside its jurisdiction. It was observed that there is a thin line
in appreciating the scope of jurisdiction of the Company Court
and the jurisdiction is exclusive, if the matter truly relates to
“rectification”, but if the issue is alien to “rectification”, such
matter may not be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Company
Court.
41. In the present case, proper verification of the assertions made
by the parties was a sine qua non. The Acting President of NCLT,
by failing to carry out the said exercise, failed to discharge the
mandate of law. Exercise of power under Section 59 of the 2013
Act is to be undertaken in right earnest by examining the material,
evidence, and the facts on record. This has not been done. Rather,
a narrow view was taken without calling upon Respondent 2 to
prove the veracity of the contrary story put forth by him, despite
receiving monies from the appellants. The facts, material, and
evidence had to be examined in the context of the underlying
facts, which would have included the receipt of monies, the
signatures on the transfer deeds, etc. Needless to state, questions
of fact must be decided on the principle of preponderance of
probabilities, giving due weight to the specific facts, as found, so as
to draw the conclusion that a reasonable person, acquainted with
the relevant field, would draw on the basis of the same facts.
(See High Court of Bombay v. Udaysingh [High Court of
Bombay v. Udaysingh, (1997) 5 SCC 129 : 1997 SCC (L&S)
1132].)
42. Neither the Acting President of NCLT nor Nclat examined,
with any seriousness, the issues raised before them to come to a
cogent conclusion as to whether the disputes raised by the
respondents were mere moonshine. Notably, in Ammonia
Supplies Corpn. [Ammonia Supplies Corpn. (P) Ltd. v. Modern
Plastic Containers (P) Ltd., (1998) 7 SCC 105] , this Court held to
that effect in the context of Section 155 of the Companies Act,
1956. Thereafter, in Adesh Kaur [Adesh Kaur v. Eicher Motors
Ltd., (2018) 7 SCC 709] also, this Court affirmed that if, on facts,
an open-and-shut case of fraud is made out in favour of the
person seeking rectification, the National Company Law
Tribunal would be entitled to exercise such power under Section
59 of the 2013 Act. Therefore, verification of this aspect was
essential but NCLT failed to discharge this mandate.”
(emphasis supplied)
34.4. Recently, the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Shailja
Krishna v. Satori Global Ltd. (supra) held that NCLT has wide
jurisdiction to examine allegations of fraud, manipulation, coercion as
mismanagement cases, which are incidental and integral to resolving
the complaint. This power stems from the need to “bring an end to the
matters complained of” [as expounded in Tata Consultancy Services
Ltd. v. Cyrus Investments Pvt. Ltd. : (2021) 9 SCC 449], specific to
any specific legislative bar restricting the power of NCLT in this
respect.
In Mrs. Shailja Krishna vs. Satori Global Limited & Ors (supra), the
appellant (majority shareholder and director in the respondent
company) alleged oppression and mismanagement through fraudulent
acts, including a forged gift deed on the strength of which the
appellant’s shares were transferred, invalid board resolutions whereby
the appellant’s alleged resignation was accepted and one of the
respondents was inducted as an additional director, and fabricated
resignation records. The NCLT ruled in favour of the appellant and
declared the transfer of the appellant’s shares by way of the gift deed
to be null and void. The appellant was also restored to her position as
an executive director. Subsequently, NCLAT reversed the decision,
holding the issues of fraud, forgery or coercion to be beyond NCLT’s
summary jurisdiction.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court decided in favour of the appellant. It was
observed that the circumstances surrounding the gift deed were
seriously questionable and the board meetings had been conducted in a
mala fide manner, which show that the affairs of the company in
appellant. The order of NCLAT was set aside and the NCLT’s
decision was restored, whereby the gift deed and share transfer forms
were declared as invalid and set aside, emphasising NCLT’s role in
providing holistic remedies.
Relying on the cases of M.S.D.C. Radharamanan v. M.S.D.
Chandrasekara Raja : (2008) 6 SCC 750 and Kamal Kumar Dutta &
Another. v. Ruby General Hospital Ltd. & Others. : (2006) 7 SCC
613, where the power of the CLB/NCLT to grant diverse reliefs was
broadly interpreted, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:
“30. The aforesaid decisions confirm the view that the National
Company Law Tribunal/Company Law Board possess a wide
jurisdiction to decide all such matters that are incidental and/or
integral to the complaint alleging oppression and
mismanagement. Such power is, however, subject to any other
legislative enactment specifically debarring the National Company
Law Tribunal/Company Law Board from exercising its powers in
this respect.
31. In the instant case, it is an admitted fact that the determination
of whether the gift deed is valid or not is central to the decision
herein and, therefore, the National Company Law Tribunal did
have full jurisdiction to decide whether the gift deed is valid or
not, or whether it is against the provisions of the Companies Act,
1956 and/or internal regulations of the company, including but not
limited to the articles of association and the memorandum of
association.
xxx
42. Applying the tests laid down in the aforesaid authorities, we
have come to the conclusion that the appellant was the victim of
oppression and mismanagement in the instant case for two reasons
: first, that the circumstances surrounding the gift deed and the
subsequent transfer of shares are seriously questionable and
must be declared invalid and secondly, the board meetings have
been conducted in a mala fide manner and against both the
regulations of the company. Both of these instances show that the
affairs of the company were being conducted in a manner
prejudicially affecting the appellant.”
(emphasis supplied)
34.5. In the case of SAS Hospitality (P) Ltd. & Anr. v. Surya
Constructions Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. : 2018:DHC:6778, the plaintiff
appellant–SAS Hospitality P. Ltd. filed a commercial suit seeking
declaration that the allotment of shares of the defendant company in
favour of Defendants 5 to 9 in the year 2013 was null and void. The
plaintiff also sought decree of injunctions restraining defendants from
giving effect to the allotment or exercising any voting rights or
creating any third-party rights. The defendants moved an application
under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC to reject the plaint as barred by
Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013. Taking note of the change in
legislative scheme, this Court held as under:
“10...The NCLT has been vested with powers that are far
reaching in respect of management and administration of
companies. The said powers of the NCLT include powers as
broad as “regulation of conduct of affairs of the company” under
Section 242(2)(a), as also various other specific powers. NCLT is
a tribunal which has been constituted to have exclusive
jurisdiction in the conduct of affairs of a company and its powers
can be contrasted with that of the CLB under the unamended
Companies Act, 1956.
11. In the 2013 Act, Sections 407 onwards deal with the
constitution of the Tribunal. Section 420 has vested the Tribunal
with powers to ‘pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit’. The
Tribunal is also vested with the power of review. Under Section
424 of the Companies Act, 2013, the Tribunal also has the same
powers and functions as are vested with a Civil Court. In addition
contempt which was hitherto not available with the CLB. In
various ways, the NCLT is not merely exercising the jurisdiction of
a Company Court under the new Act, but is also vested with
inherent powers and powers to punish for contempt. It is in this
background that the court has to decide the issue of jurisdiction,
which has been raised by the Defendant.
xxx
15. The bar contained in Section 430 of the 2013 Act is in respect
of entertaining “any suit”, or “any proceedings” which the NCLT
is “empowered to determine”. The NCLT in the present case would
be empowered to determine that the allotment of shares in favour
of the Defendant Nos.5 to 9 was not done in accordance with the
procedure prescribed under Section 62 of the 2013 Act. The NCLT
is also empowered to determine as to whether rectification of the
register is required to be carried out owing to such allotment, or
cancellation of allotment ordered, if any. The NCLT can also
determine if in the interregnum, the Defendant Nos.5 to 9 ought to
exercise any voting rights. The NCLT would be empowered to
pass any such orders as it thinks fit, for the smooth conduct of the
affairs of the company, which would include an injunction order
protecting the assets of the Defendant No.1 Company. The NCLT
would also be empowered to oversee and supervise the working of
the company, and also appoint such persons as it may deem
necessary to regulate the affairs of the company.
16. The allegations in the present case relate to non-compliance of
the stipulations in Section 62 of the 2013 Act. The non-compliance
of any conditions contained in Section 62 of the 2013 Act also
constitutes mismanagement of the company, inasmuch as under
Section 241 of the 2013 Act, the conduct of affairs of the company
“in a manner prejudicial” to any member or “in a manner
prejudicial to the interest of the company”, would be governed by
the same. The jurisdiction to go into these allegations, vests with
the Tribunal under Section 242 of the 2013 Act. Under Section
242(2), the NCLT has the power to pass “such order as it thinks
fit”, including providing for “regulation of conduct of affairs of
the company in future”. These powers are extremely broad and
are more than what a Civil Court can do. Even if in the present
case, the Court grants the reliefs sought for by the Plaintiff, after
a full trial, the effective orders in respect of regulating the
company, and administering the affairs of the company, cannot
by the NCLT, which has the exclusive jurisdiction to deal with the
affairs of the company.
17. Moreover, the powers of the NCLT being broader and wider
than what can be exercised by this Court in exercise of civil
jurisdiction under Section 9 CPC. The NCLT is a specialised
Tribunal constituted for the purpose of speedier and effective
regulation of the affairs of the companies. As observed by the
Supreme Court in Union of India v. R. Gandhi (2010) 11 SCC 1
(hereinafter, ‘R. Gandhi’) and thereafter, in Madras Bar
Association v. Union of India (2015) 8 SCC 583 (hereinafter,
‘Madras Bar Association’) the NCLT has been created by a
specific amendment in the law. The constitution of the NCLT has
been upheld...
xxx
19. The bar under Section 430 of the 2013 Act being absolute in
nature, this Court is of the view that the jurisdiction to adjudicate
the disputes raised in the present case vests with the NCLT.
xxx
26. The bar under Section 430 of the 2013 Act has, therefore, to
be strictly construed and there can be no doubt about that. The
Division Bench also considered Dhulabai v. State of M.P. AIR
1969 SC 78 (hereinafter, ‘Dhulabai’), and held as under:
“101. As, perhaps, the most authoritative pronouncement
on the issue, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court,
in Dhulabhai v State of M.P., AIR 1969 SC 78, set out
the following 7 clear principles (of which only the first
and last are really relevant to the present case), to be
applied for deciding whether a suit was barred under
Section 9 of the CPC:
"(1) Where the statute gives a finality to the orders of
the special Tribunals the civil courts' jurisdiction must
be held to be excluded if there is adequate remedy to
do what the civil courts would normally do in a suit.
Such provision, however, does not exclude those cases
where the provisions of the particular Act have not
been complied with or the statutory Tribunal has not
acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of
(2) Where there is an express bar of the jurisdiction of
the court, an examination of the scheme of the
particular Act to find the adequacy or the sufficiency of
the remedies provided may be relevant but is not
decisive to sustain the jurisdiction of the civil court.
Where there is no express exclusion the examination of
the remedies and the scheme of the particular Act to
find out the intendment becomes necessary and the
result of the inquiry may be decisive. In the latter case
it is necessary to see if the statute creates a special
right or a liability and provides for the determination
of the right or liability and further lays down that all
questions about the said right and liability shall be
determined by the Tribunals so constituted, and
whether remedies normally associated with actions in
civil courts are prescribed by the said statute or not.
(3) Challenge to the provisions of the particular Act as
ultra vires cannot be brought before Tribunals
constituted under that Act. Even the High Court cannot
go into that question on a revision or reference from
the decision of the Tribunals.
(4) When a provision is already declared
unconstitutional or the constitutionality of any
provision is to be challenged, a suit is open. A writ of
certiorari may include a direction for refund if the
claim is clearly within the time prescribed by the
Limitation Act but it is not a compulsory remedy to
replace a suit.
(5) Where the particular Act contains no machinery for
refund of tax collected in excess of constitutional limits
or illegality collected a suit lies.
(6) Questions of the correctness of the assessment
apart from its constitutionality are for the decision of
the authorities and a civil suit does not lie if the orders
of the authorities are declared to be final or there is an
express prohibition in the particular Act. In either case
the scheme of the particular Act must be examined
(7) An exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court is
not readily to be inferred unless the conditions above
set down apply."
(Emphasis supplied)
27. The Division Bench in Jai Kumar Arya (supra), after applying
Dhulabai (supra), lays down the following test:
“102 From the above authorities, the primary indicia,
which would govern determination of the question of
whether the jurisdiction of civil courts is, in any
particular case, ousted, or not, would appear to be (i)
whether the decision of the tribunal, on which
jurisdiction is conferred, is also attributed finality by the
statute, and (ii) whether such tribunal can do what the
civil court would be able to do and is, therefore, an
efficacious alternative to the civil court. Even when
these two indicia stand satisfied, the jurisdiction of the
civil court would continue to exist where the action,
complained against, violates the statute.
28. If these two tests are applied i.e., as to whether the Tribunal’s
order is attributed finality and as to whether the Tribunal would be
able to do what a Civil Court could do, it is clear that an order
under Section 59 of the 2013 Act has specific consequences for
non-compliance. The order is appealable to the appellate tribunal.
The Tribunal has to apply the principles of natural justice. Under
Section 242(2)(d) of the 2013 Act, the Tribunal can impose
restrictions on the transfer or allotment of the shares of the
company. It can also pass an interim order under Section 242(4)
of the 2013 Act. Consequences for non-compliance have also
been provided under Section 242(4) of the 2013 Act. The Plaintiffs
have a right to apply Section 242 of the 2013 Act as they own
99.96% shareholding which has been diluted to 21.44%. Any
member with more than 1/10th of the issued share capital can
approach the Tribunal. Thus, even as per Jai Kumar Arya (supra),
the order being one, which can be passed under Section 242 of the
2013 Act, the NCLT has the jurisdiction. In Jai Kumar Arya
(supra), the Court was concerned with the power of removal of
directors, which is distinct from the disputes involved in the present
case. However, by applying the tests laid down therein, it is clear
in the facts of this case that involving issues relating to allotment
members, the NCLT is `empowered to decide’ –leading to the
conclusion that this Court has no jurisdiction.”
(emphasis supplied)
34.6. In the case of Rajashree Devi vs. Bonai Industrial Company
Ltd. & Ors. : R.S.A. No. 206 of 2022, the Hon’ble High Court of
Orissa held that the plaintiff's grievance of illegal omission of his
name as a Director of the Company without consent and inclusion of
defendants in the Register of Members falls squarely within Section
59 of the Companies Act, 2013, which is cognizable exclusively by
NCLT. It was further held that Section 430 of the Companies Act,
2013 ousts civil court jurisdiction for such matters and there is no
triable issue warranting plenary adjudication. It was thus opined that
the Trial Court and First Appellate Court were respectively justified in
rejecting the plaint under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC, and the
second appeal was dismissed with no interference. The Hon’ble High
Court, relying upon the cases of SAS Hospitality (P) Ltd. & Anr. v.
Surya Constructions Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. (supra) and Shashi Prakash
Khemka v. NEPC Micon (supra), held as follows:
“42. The grievance of the Plaintiff in the suit as culled out from the
averments made in the plaint is that the name of Kumar
Harishchandra has been omitted without his knowledge and
consent and that has been substituted by the names of the
contesting Defendants, and they have been illegally included /
entered in the Register of the Members of the Company. These are
now sought to be rectified and the Plaintiff with others claim their
inclusion/ entry in the Register of the Members of the Company.
Thus, such grievance squarely comes within the ambit of Section
59 of the Companies Act, 2013 and as such is cognizable by the
in view of the provisions contained in section-430 of the
Companies Act, 2013, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court stands
ousted.
The aforesaid discussion and reasons, accordingly, provide the
answers to the substantial questions of law for holding that the
Trial Court as well as the First Appellate Court are justified in
rejecting the plaint under Order-7 Rule-11 of the Code, which
runs to confirm the impugned judgments of rejection of the plaint.”
(emphasis supplied)
35. In Shazia Rehman v. Anwar Elahi (supra), the case involved a
plaintiff who filed a commercial suit seeking relief of declaration with
regard to 4556 shares in the defendant company, which were claimed
to be fraudulently transferred by Defendant No. 1 without consent or
consideration, reducing her shareholding from 12.77% to 1.39%. The
suit was filed in response to issues raised in a prior NCLT petition (CP
91/2016) where the plaintiff was a respondent and the reduced
shareholding was highlighted. The forged transfer were central to the
petition. The defendant’s application under Order VII Rule 11 of the
CPC (and Rule 10) for rejection of plaint was dismissed by this Court.
It was held that the suit was maintainable as commercial suit under
Commercial Courts Act, 2015, as it involved complex issues of title,
fraud and individual membership rights beyond NCLT's summary
jurisdiction under Section 59 of the Companies Act, 2013. The Court
distinguished from cases where relief was purely rectification without
fraud and held that Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 does not
bar jurisdiction for standalone declaratory relief on individual rights,
individual rights of the plaintiff. The relevant portion of the judgment
is as under:
“13. The membership of share holder of a company has two
kinds of rights viz. individual membership rights and the
corporate membership rights. The individual
members/shareholder of a company are entitled to sue in civil
court in order to protect their individual rights. Individual
membership/ownership rights are a rights of a
member/shareholder to maintain himself (or herself) in full
membership/ownership with all the rights and privileges
appertaining thereto. The shareholding of the plaintiff in defendant
No. 2 Company was illegally and fraudulently transferred/reduced
by Defendant No. 1 from 5002 to 547 shares, bringing it down
from 12.77% of the issued share capital to 1.39% of the issued
share capital of the Company. As Transferred Shares, belonging to
the plaintiff, were transferred fraudulently and illegally by
defendant No. 1, the plaintiff was constrained to file the present
suit seeking prayers of declaration, mandatory injunction and
permanent injunction in order to assert her individual rights in
respect of the Transferred Shares, in opposition to the individual
rights asserted by defendant No. 1 qua the Transferred Shares.
xxx
15. In the present case, prior to rectification of the register of
members, inter alia, (a) the fraudulent execution of the share
transfer forms would be required to set aside and declared void ab
initio; and (b) the question of title of the Plaintiff in relation to the
Transferred Shares would be required to be adjudicated; (c) the
question whether Plaintiff was paid the consideration for the so
called transfer shares be required to be examined; and (d) the
Plaintiff would be required to be declared as the owner of the
Transferred Shares.
16. In terms section 59 of the Companies Act, 2013, the learned
NCLT is not empowered to decide and/or grant reliefs of the
above nature, predominantly pertaining to individual rights, but
only empowered to direct the company to rectify its register of
members, if it finds merit in the case of the person aggrieved.
Additionally, in terms section 59 of the Companies Act, 2013, aided
by Rule 70 of the NCLT Rules, 2016, in a case where the provisions
superficially examine the title of person aggrieved, in respect of the
shares of which he/she is seeking rectification (based on the
documents on record), but not to decide the complex question of a
seriously disputed title or grant of declaratory/injunctive reliefs,
again which predominantly pertain to individual rights of the
Plaintiff.
17. Therefore, from the conspectus of the aforesaid, in case of
individual rights of a member of a company, such as in the
present case, there is no remedy under the Companies Act, 2013,
the said right can be enforced in the civil court. In Naresh
Dayal v. The Delhi Gymkhana Club Ltd., 2021 SCC OnLine Del
91 the Court held Individual members of a company can sue in a
civil court to protect their individual rights. Ld. NCLT has no
jurisdiction to decide cause of action over which it has no power
under Companies Act.
18. Even otherwise, the case in hand cannot be adjudicated by the
learned NCLT as the subject matter of the suit pertains to
fraudulent transfer of the Transferred Shares, as elaborated
hereinabove. The Plaintiff has pointed out the fraudulent act of
the Defendant No. 1 in the Plaint. The Section 59 of
the Companies Act, 2013 does not envisage an adjudication by
the Ld. NCLT in relation to the frauds committed by the company
or individuals. In the present case, the specific averments in the
Plaint point towards fraud committed by the Defendants No. 1 and
2. The allegations of fraud are to be adjudicated upon only by the
civil court through the detailed and meticulous process of trial
before it. In Mukesh Jaiswal v. Phool Chand Gupta, 2022 SCC
OnLine Cal 3957 the Court held the Ld. NCLT cannot decide the
question of fraud as the Plaintiff has taken specific ground of
fraud.
19. Per section 430 of Companies Act, 2013 civil court's
jurisdiction is diminished only to an extent the Ld. NCLT has been
correspondingly empowered. A bare reading of section 430 of
the Companies Act, 2013, makes it clear the extent of the ouster
of the jurisdiction of the civil court is directly proportionate to the
extent of conferment of jurisdiction on the Ld. NCLT. Further, it
is settled law the exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts
is not to be readily inferred, but that such exclusion must either
be explicitly expressed or clearly implied. There is a thin line in
appreciating the scope of jurisdiction of Ld. NCLT. In the present
the matter truly pertained to rectification of register of members.
However, if the issue is alien to rectification of register of members
such matter would not be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Ld. NCLT.
21. Thus, in the present matter, the question relates to disputed title
and fraudulent transfer of the Transferred Shares. Therefore,
learned NCLT, being a summary jurisdiction, is not empowered
to decide such questions and said questions can only be decided
by a civil courts i.e. this Hon'ble Court. Accordingly, the
jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court is not barred.
22. In Sita Chaudhry v. Verinder Singh, 2022 SCC OnLine Del
2235 the Court held rectification of register would only be a
subsequent step after the question of title and ownership of share
is decided. The exclusive jurisdiction vested with the erstwhile
Company Law Board/NCLT is only in respect of rectification of
the register. However, the right, title and interest in shares can
only be determined in a civil suit. In Bakshi Faiz Ahmad v. Bakshi
Farooq Ahmad, 2018 SCC OnLine J&K 249 the Court
held qua applicability of provisions of Companies Act, 2013, the
Tribunal has no power to decide the title of the shares in
summary proceedings. The Tribunal has a power only to decide
the issue of rectification of register of members and has no power
to decide the issue of title. The word ‘title’ has not been included
in section 58 of the Companies Act, 2013. In Jai Mahal Hotels
Pvt. Ltd. v. Devraj Singh, (2016) 1 SCC 423 the Court held the
rectification jurisdiction is exclusive if the matter truly relates to
rectification but if the issue is alien to rectification, such matter
may not be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Company
Court/Company Law Board. If a seriously disputed question of
title arose, the Company Court should relegate the parties to a
suit, which was more the appropriate remedy for investigation
and adjudication of such seriously disputed question of title.
In Standard Chartered Bank v. Andhra Bank Financial
Services, (2006) 6 SCC 94 the Court held the jurisdiction
exercised by the Company Court in relation to rectification of
register of member is somewhat summary in nature and if a
seriously disputed question of title arose, the Company Court
should relegate the parties to a suit, which was more the
appropriate remedy for investigation and adjudication of such
seriously disputed question of title. In Ammonia Supplies
Corporation v. Modern Plastic Containers, (1998) 7 SCC 105 the
whether the dispute raised is really for rectification or is of such a
nature that unless decided first it would not come within the
purview of rectification. If it truly is rectification, all matters
raised in that connection should be decided by the Company
Court and if it finds adjudication of any matter not falling under
it, it may direct a party to get his right adjudicated by a civil court.
In N. Ramji v. Ashwath Narayan Ramji, 2017 SCC OnLine Mad
37591 the court held it is relevant to note as per Section 111A of
the Companies Act, 1956, the Company Law Board was
empowered to decide the issue of title also. The word ‘title’ was
not included in Section 58 of the Companies Act, 2013. Even
while considering the Section 111A, it was held by the Hon'ble
Apex Court a seriously disputed question of title cannot be
decided by the Company Court or Company Law Board. This
conclusion was arrived by the Hon'ble Apex Court by taking into
consideration of the jurisdiction of the Company Law board is
summary in nature. The procedure in National Company Law
Tribunal constituted under the Companies Act, 2013 is also
summary in nature.
23. I have also gone through the judgments relied upon by the
learned counsel for defendants. In Shahi Prakash Khemka (supra)
the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court were not in the
context of disputed title to the shares. In the said case the dispute
was not amongst the members in relation to title of shares or with
regard to the individual rights of the members. However, the same
was inter se the Company and its member/shareholder purely in
relation to rectification of register of members. In fact, the
observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India the learned
NCLT would have exclusive jurisdiction was only in the context of
Section 59 of the Companies Act, 2013 whereas in the present
matter, as, the Plaintiff is alleging the fraud on the part of the
Defendant No. 1 and asserting her individual rights of title (and
other rights and interest) qua the Transferred Shares, and not
rectification of register of members. Therefore, the said judgment
would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
present case
24. SAS Hospitality Pvt Ltd (supra) is also not applicable to the
facts of the case as in this decision the challenge before the Court
was in respect of allotment of shares by the Company in favour of
certain defendants. The allegations in the matter pertain to the
actions of the company perse with regards to its affairs in relation
to the illegal allotment of shares by the company, thus, it was not
members/shareholders of the Company were being asserted. In
the present matter, as, the Plaintiff is alleging fraud on the part of
Defendant No. 1 and asserting her individual rights of title (and
other rights and interest) qua the Transferred Shares, and not
rectification of register of members, therefore, the said judgment
would not be applicable in the facts and circumstances of the
present case. The judgment rendered in Sita
Chaudhary v. Verinder Singh, 2022 SCC OnLine Del
2235 distinguishes the applicability of the ratio in SAS Hospitality
in the context of disputes in relation to title of shares, and holds in
the context of disputes of title of shares the ratio of SAS Hospitality
would not be applicable as the same was rendered in the context of
internal affairs of the company, interalia, in relation to allotment of
shares.
25. In view of the above, the I.A.1143/2020 under Order VII Rule
10 CPC read with Section 151 CPC is dismissed.”
(emphasis supplied)
Appraisal of the facts of the present case in light of the law as
discussed above
36. In the impugned order, the learned District Judge has dismissed
the objection of the petitioner in relation to bar under Section 430 of
the Companies Act, 2013 on essentially two counts– firstly, that the
learned NCLT does not have the jurisdiction to decide the dispute
involved in the suit as the same pertains to declaration of certain
documents as forged, which is primarily a civil dispute; and secondly,
that the primary relief in the suit is in relation to declaration of certain
documents as forged and the learned NCLT has no jurisdiction to
declare documents as such, due to which, the suit is not hit by the bar
under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013.
37. Firstly, insofar as the NCLT’s jurisdiction to decide the issue of
company petition is filed is itself under serious question as the
documents on the basis of which the petitioner claims to be a
shareholder are forged. Undisputably, the said defence has been
agitated by the plaintiffs before the learned NCLT as well.
38. It is apparent from the aforesaid judgments that there is nothing
in the Companies Act, 2013 which estops the NCLT from rendering a
finding that the documents in question are forged, even under
summary procedure, and the learned Trial Court has erred in holding
that only the Civil Court is empowered to decide matters pertaining to
fraud.
39. NCLT is a specialised Tribunal constituted for the purpose of
speedier and effective regulation of the affairs of companies and Sub-
clause 3 of Section 241 of the Companies Act, 2013 specifically
provides that if there are circumstances which suggest that “any
person concerned in the conduct and management of the affairs of a
company is or has been in connection therewith guilty of fraud”, the
Central Government may initiate a case against such person and refer
the same to the Tribunal, whereby NCLT has the power to “inquire
into the case and record a decision”. Thus, the questions pertaining to
fraud are not alien to the NCLT as a Tribunal and as per the statute
itself, it is apparent that the NCLT is capable to take a decision on the
same. The fact that the jurisdiction under sub-section 3 of Section 241
the Companies Act, 2013 can be invoked only by the Central
cognizance of the matters concerning fraud, etcetera and to pass
appropriate orders.
40. Having found that NCLT is not entirely barred from
adjudicating issues of fraud and that the learned Trial Court had erred
on the said fundamental aspect by holding that only Civil Courts have
the jurisdiction to adjudicate such issues, it is now to be determined as
to whether the issues as agitated in the present case in relation to
forgery are such which cannot be looked into by NCLT.
41. Mere plea of forgery or fraud is not sufficient, by itself, to
overcome the bar under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 and
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal can only be ousted when the issue
involved is not “within the peripheral field of rectification” and
pertains to extensively complex questions.
42. Even if it is to be assumed that the forgery is so complex that it
cannot be untangled by NCLT under a summary procedure, this Court
is of the opinion that such pleas qua fraud or forgery cannot confer the
jurisdiction upon the Civil Court to pre-empt adjudication of issues,
which are already pending determination, before the learned NCLT
has a chance to assess the material on record and arrive at such a
conclusion, especially when NCLT prima facie seems empowered to
look into the said issue. Concluding otherwise would result in pleas of
fraud being agitated solely to oust the jurisdiction of the NCLT. As
held in Ammonia Supplies Corpn. (P) Ltd. v. Modern Plastic
made, it is incumbent that the learned NCLT determine as to whether
such contentions are raised merely to oust its jurisdiction.
43. During the course of arguments, the petitioner had relied upon
the case of Kavita Arora v. Leptons Designtek (P) Ltd. (supra), where
a Coordinate Bench of this Court had found that the Tribunal has the
requisite jurisdiction to adjudicate the allegations of forgery and
fabrication by placing reliance upon Rule 43 of the NCLT Rules,
2016, to contend that the NCLT is vested with sufficient powers to
determine issues of fraud. The plaintiffs have contested the said
assertion by arguing that the said Rule has limited applicability qua
statutory records alone, however, the documents in the present case,
including the Shareholders Agreement et al., have not been made part
of the statutory records of the company.
44. While it may be correct that the documents in question are not
part of the statutory record of Respondent No. 4 company, even
otherwise, the Tribunal has wide powers to test the cogency of non-
statutory documents as is evident from the Companies Act, 2013 as
well as the NCLT Rules, 2016.
45. In the impugned order, the learned Trial Court has observed that
the suit pertains to validity of documents and “not necessarily” a
matter under the Companies Act, 2013. Law laid down by the Hon’ble
Apex Court in cases such as Shailja Krishna v. Satori Global Ltd.
Technologies Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. (supra) has established NCLT’s
expanding role in fraud, coercion or forgery adjudication.
46. The observation made by the learned Trial Court is therefore
unmerited. In the opinion of this Court, the issue of fraud and
fabrication as agitated by the plaintiffs is incidental and integral to the
complaint alleging oppression and mismanagement filed by the
petitioner, and the same thus falls within the remit of the learned
NCLT.
47. In the present case, the plaint indicates that it is the case of the
plaintiffs themselves that the fabrication of the main Shareholders
Agreement dated 30.07.2020 is prima facie evident from a number of
ancillary circumstances–two of the plaintiffs who had allegedly signed
the agreement were not in Delhi or Uttar Pradesh on the concerned
date; the agreement resembles a draft agreement shared subsequently;
the signatures on the document being forged as apparently confirmed
by forensic examination by government laboratory; the terms of the
agreement being gross; the agreement not giving correct data
pertaining to Respondent No.4 company on the concerned date; etc.
Furthermore, the Securities Transfer forms and undated receipts for
consideration are alleged to be similarly forged as they were never
signed or executed by the plaintiffs, and some of the said documents
allegedly contradict equity discussions. Similarly, the Board
concerned plaintiffs and the same are allegedly also printed on the old
letterhead.
48. Although there is some dispute as to the title of the shares of
Respondent No.4 company, however, the test to oust the jurisdiction
of the learned NCLT is to raise such seriously disputed questions of
title and fraud, which are so complex, that they cannot be determined
by the learned NCLT.
49. Prima facie, it does not seem that the facts are so complex or
convoluted that the aforesaid issues cannot be determined by the
Tribunal in exercise of its wide powers as encompassed in the
Companies Act, 2013 and NCLT Rules, 2016.
50. Secondly, as far as the issue in relation to NCLT not having the
jurisdiction to grant the reliefs that are sought is concerned,
pertinently, Section 242 of the Companies Act, 2013 clearly
empowers the NCLT to nullify the legal effect of such documents. In
fact, where the lis concerns oppression and mismanagement under
Sections 241 and 242 of the Companies Act, 2013, the statute permits
restrictions on transfer or allotment of shares; permits termination,
setting aside or modification of agreements with directors, managers
and with any other person, and concludes with a residuary head that
the Tribunal may provide for any other matter for which it is just and
51. Reliance is placed by the plaintiffs on the case Shazia Rehman
v. Anwar Elahi (supra) to contend that the power of the learned
NCLT to grant reliefs is severely limited. As discussed above, in the
said case, a Coordinate Bench of this Court was pleased to reject the
argument raised by the defendant in relation to ouster of jurisdiction of
Civil Court under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 as the
plaint therein pertained to rectification of shares. While dismissing the
application for rejection of plaint, the Coordinate Bench was
particularly weighed by the judgment in Sita Chaudhry v. Verinder
Singh : 2022 SCC OnLine Del 2235 (also relied upon by the
plaintiffs), where it was held that rectification is only a subsequent
step after question of title and ownership of shares is decided, and the
exclusive jurisdiction vested with the Company Court is only in
relation to rectification of register. It was also noted in that case that
the right or title in shares can only be determined in a Civil Suit. The
civil suit appears to have been filed after institution of proceedings
before the learned NCLT in that case as well.
52. In Shazia Rehman v. Anwar Elahi (supra), reliance was also
placed on the case of Naresh Dayal and Ors. v. The Delhi Gymkhana
Club Ltd. and Ors. : (2021) SCC OnLine Del 91 to observe that
NCLT is not empowered to decide and/or grant reliefs which
predominantly pertain to individual rights, and that in case of
individual rights of a member of a company, there is no remedy under
the Companies Act, 2013. In that case, the suit was filed by seven
maintainability, claiming ouster under Section 430 of the Companies
Act, 2013, as the dispute fell under NCLT’s jurisdiction for
oppression/mismanagement (Section 242 of the Companies Act,
2013). The court held the suit to be maintainable and held that Section
242 of the Companies Act, 2013 empowers NCLT in cases of winding
up and where the company’s affairs are being conducted in a manner
prejudicial to such members. It was noted that the plaintiffs’ basis for
instituting the suit was the manner in which Articles of Association
was interpreted, which was purportedly creating irrational and illegal
classification. It was noted that the same does not invoke “oppression”
or require winding up. It was thus held that the NCLT lacks power to
determine such standalone civil rights enforcement and the jurisdiction
of the Civil Court under Section 9 of the CPC is not ousted. The
relevant portion is as under:
“23. Section 242 of the Companies Act which provides for the
power of the Tribunal contemplates an action relating to the affairs
of the company which is being conducted in a manner prejudicial
or oppressive to any member or members and that to wind up the
company would unfairly prejudice such member or members, but
the facts justify the makings of a winding up order, the power of the
NCLT can be invoked. However, in the present suit the plaintiffs do
not claim winding up of the defendant No.1 Club which is a
company by guarantee. As noted above, the cause of action
pleaded by the plaintiff in this suit is the manner in which Article
13(3)(b) of the Articles of Association of the defendant company is
being interpreted thereby creating irrational and illegal`.
classification. NCLT not being empowered to determine the said
cause of action, this Court is of the opinion that the plea of the
defendant that the present suit is not maintainable and only a
petition before the NCLT is maintainable, is liable to be rejected.
Thus, issue No.1 is decided in favour of the plaintiffs and against
53. It cannot be disputed that a Civil court’s jurisdiction is ousted
only to the extent the statutory forum is expressly and correspondingly
empowered, and such exclusion is not to be lightly inferred. However,
as already discussed, it has since been settled by the Hon’ble Apex
Court that the NCLT possesses a wide jurisdiction to decide such
issues which are integral to the subject complaint.
54. Pertinently, one of the issues involved in Shailja Krishna v.
Satori Global Ltd. (supra) was that of transfer of title by way of a
purportedly forged gift deed, and it was found that NCLT had full
jurisdiction to determine the validity of the gift deed and to declare the
transfer of shares as invalid. In Chalasani Udaya Shankar and Ors. v.
Lexus Technologies Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. (supra), where the
respondents had raised a similar defence qua title before NCLT and
denied any transfer of shares to the party which had instituted the
petition, the Hon’ble Apex Court had overturned the decision of
NCLT, which had found that it had no jurisdiction to try the petition,
and held that NCLT had erred in not examining as to whether the
issues raised before them were mere moonshine. The said judgments
make it clear that merely agitating issues of fraud or forgery will not
dilute the bar under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 and it is
for the Tribunal to make an assessment as to whether there is any
cogency in such allegations and if the dispute is so complex that it
cannot be decided by the Tribunal. The thin line is that if the dispute
truly, in pith and substance, concerns rectification simpliciter or
broad Companies Act regime, the specialised Tribunal is vested with
exclusive jurisdiction to determine the same along with any other
ancillary issues that are integral to determine the issue at hand. If such
an argument is accepted, parties will agitate issues of fraud and
coercion to simply cause ouster of NCLT’s jurisdiction. This makes it
important that once a case is instituted before NCLT involving such
issues as well, no such case as the present one be instituted which
involves the same issues, before NCLT itself makes a determination in
regard to the cogency and complexity of the dispute.
55. Undisputably, where the plaintiff asserts public rights or raises
seriously disputed questions of title that require declaratory and
injunctive relief after evidence and trial, the remedy lies in the civil
court. However, as noted above, in the present case, the issues sought
to be agitated in the suit are such which are integral to the petition
already filed by the petitioner before the learned NCLT.
56. Moreover, in the opinion of this Court, the words “any matter”
in Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 are to be understood in
contradistinction of “any reliefs” which the Tribunal is empowered to
grant. The ouster of jurisdiction of Civil Court is not limited to or
conditional on the ability of the Tribunal to grant a relief of a
particular nature and is rather hedged upon the wider phrase – “any
matter”, which the Tribunal is empowered to determine. Thus, the
learned Trial Court has erred gravely in limiting the applicability of
the apparent inability of the NCLT to grant a particular relief. Though
a party cannot approach the Tribunal for solely seeking declarations
qua title, the NCLT is empowered to determine such an issue if the
same is integral to the complaint instituted before it and to nullify the
effect of the subject documents in pursuance of a just and equitable
resolution.
57. In the present case, at the cost of repetition, it is also imperative
to emphasise that the learned NCLT has not yet made any such
determination qua the cogency of such assertions or the complexity of
the dispute. If the suit is allowed to continue, the same would also lead
to multiplicity of proceedings which could lead to conflicting opinions
on the same issues of fact and law.
Principle of judicial comity and conundrum of parallel proceedings
58. At this juncture, it is imperative to take note of the principle of
judicial comity. The Hon'ble Apex Court in Electrosteel Castings Ltd.
v. UV Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd. : (2022) 2 SCC 573 has held that
mere allegations of fraud in the plaint will not overcome the bar under
Section 34 of the SARFAESI Act.
Pertinently, the provisions in relation to power of Debt Recovery
Tribunal and the exclusion of Civil Court in regard to disputes under
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (‘SARFAESI Act’) are
Act, 2013, Section 34 of the SARFAESI Act provides that a Civil
Court shall have no jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which a Debts Recovery Tribunal or Appellate
Tribunal is empowered by or under the SARFAESI Act to determine.
The said case involved an assignment deed, whereunder, proceedings
were initiated against the plaintiff, who had stood as a guarantor,
under Section 13(2) of the SARFAESI Act and notice was issued to
the plaintiff. The plaintiff claimed the assignment deed to be
fraudulent and filed a suit before the Hon’ble High Court of Madras,
which was dismissed as being barred by Section 34 of the SARFAESI
Act.
This case is crucial as the same was hinged on the fact that there were
only allegations of fraud in the plaint without anything further. If there
is something more than mere allegations of fraud, certainly, the Civil
Court’s jurisdiction will not be ousted, however, in that case it was
found that the plaint was cleverly moulded to overcome the bar under
Section 34 of the SARFAESI Act. The relevant paragraphs of the
judgment are as under:
“9. Having considered the pleadings and averments in the suit
more particularly the use of word “fraud” even considering the
case on behalf of the plaintiff, we find that the allegations of
“fraud” are made without any particulars and only with a view to
get out of the bar under Section 34 of the Sarfaesi Act and by
such a clever drafting the plaintiff intends to bring the suit
maintainable despite the bar under Section 34 of the Sarfaesi Act,
which is not permissible at all and which cannot be approved.
Even otherwise it is required to be noted that it is the case on
approved resolution plan under IBC and thereafter the original
corporate debtor being discharged there shall not be any debt so
far as the plaintiff-appellant herein is concerned and therefore
the assignment deed can be said to be “fraudulent”.
10. The aforesaid cannot be accepted. By that itself the assignment
deed cannot be said to be “fraudulent”. In any case, whether there
shall be legally enforceable debt so far as the plaintiff-appellant
herein is concerned even after the approved resolution plan
against the corporate debtor still there shall be the liability of the
plaintiff and/or the assignee can be said to be secured creditor
and/or whether any amount is due and payable by the plaintiff, are
all questions which are required to be dealt with and considered by
the DRT in the proceedings initiated under the Sarfaesi Act.
11. It is required to be noted that as such in the present case the
assignee has already initiated the proceedings under Section 13
which can be challenged by the plaintiff-appellant herein by way of
application under Section 17 of the Sarfaesi Act before the DRT on
whatever the legally available defences which may be available to
it. We are of the firm opinion that the suit filed by the plaintiff-
appellant herein was absolutely not maintainable in view of the bar
contained under Section 34 of the Sarfaesi Act. Therefore, as such
the courts below have not committed any error in rejecting the
plaint/dismissing the suit in view of the bar under Section 34 of
the Sarfaesi Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
59. Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 must be applied on the
same first principles that animate in Section 34 of the SARFAESI Act.
60. As discussed above, the bar on the jurisdiction of the Civil
Court is coextensive with the aspects which the special forum is
empowered to determine, and not greater. The test is substance, not
form. If the core controversy is one which the NCLT is empowered to
decide by or under the Companies Act, the Civil Court’s jurisdiction
respect of any action taken or to be taken under the Act. In
Electrosteel Castings Ltd. v. UV Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd.
(supra), the Hon'ble Apex Court has read Section 34 of the
SARFAESI Act in this very manner, and warned that clever drafting
or bare allegations of fraud cannot be used to evade a jurisdictional
bar.
61. Similarly, clever drafting or crafty legal strategies must not be
allowed to frustrate the process of law before the learned NCLT. In
contradistinction to the SARFAESI Act, the Companies Act, 2013
confers broad remedial powers on the Tribunal and under Section 430
of the Companies Act, 2013, the exception is narrow because the
NCLT’s just and equitable powers under Section 242 of the
Companies Act, 2013 are intentionally wide. Disputes about the
affairs of the company, its organs, its share capital, or its internal and
managerial contracts belong to the NCLT, even if parties invoke labels
such as declaration, injunction or fraud. Only claims that are genuinely
external to company law, for example– a pure third-party property or
tort claim unconnected with corporate affairs and for which the
Companies Act, 2013 furnishes no forum or remedy, would escape
Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013.
62. In every case, where the controversy is anchored in the
company’s affairs and the issue is one which the Tribunal or the
Appellate Tribunal is empowered to determine the matter in question,
compels recourse to the NCLT and, in appeal, to the NCLAT,
strengthening the case for regaling such disputes to the NCLT.
63. Even if the case of the plaintiffs is taken at the highest, the
doctrine of judicial comity emphasises mutual respect and deference
among courts to avoid conflicting decisions and to promote judicial
harmony and may be invoked in challenges under Order VII Rule
11(d) of the CPC (rejection of plaint as “barred by any law” due to
statutory ouster or parallel proceedings). While comity is discretionary
and often overlaps with statutory bars, it serves as an underlying
principle to interpret these provisions, particularly in cases of
concurrent jurisdiction or multiplicity of proceedings.
64. Courts ought to apply the said doctrine to restrain proceedings
where another forum’s authority is established, enduring efficiency
without absolute ouster. In challenges under Order VII Rule 11(d) of
the CPC, comity may be used to interpret “barred by law” broadly,
including deference to foreign/prior forums, leading to rejection of
plaint.
65. Once the issues as raised in the plaint have already been
agitated in the company petition filed by the petitioner and the learned
NCLT is seized of the said integral issues, the Civil Court cannot
assume jurisdiction to adjudicate the same, unless it is so found at a
subsequent stage while determining the issues at hand that the matter
requires detailed and extensive trial into the allegations which cannot
66. Needless to say, if the Tribunal later finds the scope of dispute
to be outside its jurisdiction, the plaintiffs would be at liberty to
agitate the said issues in a civil proceeding thereafter.
CONCLUSION
67. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the impugned order is set
aside. Consequently, the plaint of the respondent plaintiffs is rejected
under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC on account of the same being
barred under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013.
68. Having found that the suit is not maintainable at this juncture as
being barred by Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013, this Court
does not deem it apposite to delve into the remaining issues in relation
to pecuniary jurisdiction or the dispute in the suit being manifestly
commercial in nature, the same being academic in nature at this stage.
69. The present petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms. Pending
applications stand disposed of.
AMIT MAHAJAN, J
DECEMBER 4, 2025/‘KDK’