COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: FAO (COMM) 247/2024
DATE: 22.12.2025
PLAINTIFF: HARISH MITTAL 
DEFENDANT: KISHAN GOPAL RATHI 
JUDGE: Justice TUSHAR RAO GEDELA

----JUDGMENT----

1. Present appeal has been filed under Order 43 Rule 1 of CPC, 1908
against the order dated 22.11.2024 passed by the learned District Judge
(Comm.), Karkardooma Courts, Delhi in Misc. DJ No.583/2024 titled Harish
Mittal vs. Kishan Gopal Rathi whereby the application of the
appellant/defendant under Order IX Rule 13, CPC read with Section 151,
CPC, 1908 seeking setting aside of the ex parte decree and judgement dated
17.05.2023 passed in CS(COMM) 535/2021 titled Shri Kishan Gopal Rathi
vs. Shri Harish Mittal was dismissed. The present appeal also assails the ex
parte decree and judgement dated 17.05.2023 whereby the suit was decreed in
favour of the respondent/plaintiff for an amount of Rs.7,72,526/- along with
pendente lite and future interest @ 9% per annum till its realization; with
costs and expenses.
2. In December, 2021, a suit bearing CS(COMM) 535/2021 for recovery
of a sum of Rs. 7,72,526/- was filed by the respondent/plaintiff against the
appellant/defendant before the learned District Judge, Karkardooma Courts,
Delhi. Summons of the recovery suit were issued upon the
appellant/defendant returnable on 01.02.2022. However, the
appellant/defendant remained unserved and fresh summons were issued
through ordinary as well as electronic mode subject to filing of affidavit of
correctness as per Rule 12 of the Delhi Court Services of Process (Civil
Proceeding) Rules, 2010 returnable on 14.03.2022. On 14.03.2022, the
appellant/defendant was reported to be served through Whatsapp/E-mail.
However, it was observed that as the Nazarat branch neither informed the
appellant/defendant over phone, nor it was mentioned whether the said e-mail
was duly received or bounced back, nor the screenshots of the e-mail and
Whatsapp have been annexed, hence, fresh summons were issued.
3. On 11.05.2022, the summons again remained unserved and the
respondent/plaintiff sought liberty to move an application under Order V
Rules 20, CPC for substituted service. Thereafter, on 30.05.2022, the said
application moved by the respondent/plaintiff for substituted service of the
appellant/defendant was allowed by the learned Trial Court observing that the
defendant cannot be served by ordinary process and it is avoiding the service.
Accordingly, the respondent/plaintiff served the appellant/defendant by
substituted mode, by way of publication in the national newspaper “The
Statesman” dated 12.06.2022. On 01.12.2022, the learned Trial Court
observed that the defendant was duly served with the summons of suit by
substituted means yet not appeared and thus, was proceeded ex parte.
4. Thereafter, after hearing the arguments and examining the evidence led
by the respondent/plaintiff, the learned Trial Court passed the ex parte decree
and judgement dated 17.05.2023 whereby the suit was decreed in favour of
the respondent/plaintiff for an amount of Rs.7,72,526/- along with pendente
lite and future interest @ 9% per annum till its realization; with costs and
expenses.
5. In April, 2024, an execution petition bearing EX (COMM) 73/2024
was filed by the respondent/plaintiff. It is the case of the appellant/defendant
that it was when the Bailiff appointed by the Court came to the residence with
warrants of attachment to execute the decree that the appellant, for the first
time, came to know about the ex parte judgement and decree dated
17.05.2023 passed against him. On 12.06.2024, the appellant duly filed
objections in the execution petition and thereafter, on 22.08.2024, the
appellant filed an application under Order IX Rule 13 read with Section 151,
CPC for setting aside the ex parte decree passed against him. The said
application came to be rejected by the learned Trial Court vide impugned
order dated 22.11.2024. Hence, the present appeal.
6. Mr. Vikas Khatri, learned counsel for the appellant stated that the ex
parte judgment and decree was passed by the learned Trial Court on
17.05.2023. He submitted that it was only when the Bailiff appointed by the
Executing Court came to the residence of the appellant/defendant with the
warrants of attachment to execute the decree that the appellant for the first
time gained knowledge about the ex parte judgment and decree dated
17.05.2023 passed against him. He submitted that at the first instance, the
appellant/defendant filed his objections to the execution petition on
12.06.2024. It was under the legal advice that the appellant preferred an
application under Order IX Rule 13 read with Section 151, CPC seeking
setting aside of the ex parte judgment and decree passed against him on the
ground that the appellant/defendant was never served the summons of the suit
alongwith the suit plaint. He stated that the present appeal has been preferred
by the appellant against the impugned order dated 22.11.2024 passed by the
learned Trial Court dismissing his application under Order IX Rule 13, CPC.
7. Learned counsel for the appellant invited attention of this Court to the
application filed by the appellant under Order IX Rule 13, CPC, particularly
to para 8 wherein it was categorically mentioned that the premises bearing
no.9/6241, Nehru Gali, Subhash Mohalla, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 was
sold to one Smt. Shivani Sharma in the month of February, 2018 and the
business was shut down after handing over physical possession to the
purchaser and therefore, the service could not be effected upon the appellant
at the said address. He also contended that in para 9 of the said application, it
was averred that the residential address of the appellant i.e. A-76, Gali No.8,
Rajgarh Colony, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 was known to the
respondent/plaintiff despite which, for some unknown or oblique reasons, the
respondent/plaintiff chose not to mention it in the memo of parties
accompanying the suit plaint. He submitted that the alternative address which
was provided in the memo of parties was a fictitious address and does not
belong to the appellant/defendant.
8. Inviting attention to the memo of parties of the suit plaint, learned
counsel for the appellant categorically submitted that even the email address
provided by the respondent/plaintiff purporting it to be belonging to the
respondent/defendant, is a fictitious email address. In any case, he contended
that no email containing the summons of the suit was ever received by the
appellant/defendant.
9. In order to demonstrate the deliberate and willful attempt of the
respondent/plaintiff to obtain an ex parte decree by concealing the correct and
known address of the appellant/defendant being writ large, the learned
counsel for the appellant drew our attention to the memo of parties
accompanying the execution petition filed in respect of the ex parte judgment
and decree dated 17.05.2023. He contended that apart from the address of the
premises which were sold in the year 2018, and the fictitious address as
reflected in the memo of parties accompanying the suit plaint, the
respondent/plaintiff had also furnished the correct residential address as
mentioned in para 9 of the application under Order IX Rule 13, CPC as well
as the address of the new shop/premises from where the appellant/defendant
has been carrying on business from and after February, 2018. According to
him, this gathers great significance for the reason that the suit for recovery is
predicated on the invoices raised by the respondent/plaintiff upon the
appellant/defendant from and after July, 2018. He stoutly contended that this
document itself would establish that the respondent/plaintiff was all the while
aware of and in the know of the address at IX/622, Krishna Gali No.2,
Subhash Road, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031. If that be so, according to
learned counsel, there was no reason to have concealed the correct address of
the appellant/defendant in the memo of parties accompanying the suit plaint.
He vehemently contended that all this was done only to ensure that the
appellant/defendant does not get a fair opportunity to defend the suit on its
merits.
10. That apart, learned counsel for the appellant invited attention to the
order dated 14.03.2022 of the learned Trial Court wherein even after noticing,
according to learned counsel erroneously, that the appellant/defendant was
served through whatsapp and email, learned Trial Court, at the request of the
respondent/plaintiff, directed issuance of fresh summons of the suit to be
served upon the appellant/defendant by all permissible modes. He would
contend that once the above observation was made by the learned Trial Court
pursuant whereto, a direction for fresh service by all permissible modes upon
the appellant/defendant was issued, the question of the learned Trial Court, in
the impugned order, noting that the defendant was served by whatsapp is an
error on record. That by itself, would entitle the appellant/defendant to setting
aside of the ex parte judgment and decree dated 17.05.2023.
11. Learned counsel for the appellant also argued that ordinarily, once the
service of summons has not been correctly effected upon the defendant in a
particular case, unless the procedure under Order V Rule 17, CPC is
exhausted, the right or entitlement of a plaintiff to seek service by way of
substituted mode as envisaged under Order V Rule 20, CPC cannot be
resorted to. In the present context, he contended that the learned Trial Court
had committed an error in law by surpassing/bypassing the procedure
prescribed under Order V Rule 17 of the CPC. This, according to him, was
mandatory. In that regard, he relied upon the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Neerja Realtors (P) Ltd. vs. Janglu (Through LR): (2018)
2 SCC 649, particularly para nos.14 and 15. Thus, he contended that the
deemed service under Order V Rule 20, CPC would not be an effective
service disentitling the appellant/defendant from seeking setting aside of the
ex parte judgment and decree dated 17.05.2023. On the basis of the aforesaid,
he submitted that the impugned order dated 22.11.2024 rejecting the
application of the appellant under Order IX Rule 13, CPC passed by the
learned Trial Court be set aside and the appellant be permitted to participate
in the suit proceedings.
12. Per contra, Mr. Sengupta, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent/plaintiff vehemently refuted the submissions of the
appellant/defendant.
13. At the outset, Mr. Sengupta invited attention to the application under
Order IX Rule 13 CPC filed by the appellant/defendant, particularly to para 6
wherein the appellant admitted that the premises bearing No.9/6241, Subhash
Mohalla, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 was let out to one Mr. Manish Mantri
w.e.f. 01.04.2017 to 31.12.2019 and the said Manish Mantri, during the said
period, was conducting business and handling the statement of accounts of
M/s. Heena Overseas (proprietorship firm of the appellant). He also relied on
para 7 of the said application to submit that the appellant also averred that Mr.
Manish Mantri had informed him (appellant/defendant) that he had paid the
entire payment of goods to the respondent/plaintiff. Learned counsel
submitted that no document to prove the aforesaid submission was ever filed
by the appellant/defendant.
14. He further submitted that the learned Trial Court in its orders has
clearly noted that the appellant/defendant was served summons of the suit by
whatsapp mode as also by e-mail. In particular, he referred to order dated
14.03.2022 wherein it was specifically noted that the appellant/defendant has
been served through whatsapp and e-mail and it was reported on the process
issued to the appellant on whatsapp that blue tick was visible. That apart, for
abundant precaution, the respondent/plaintiff had also filed an application
under Order V Rule 20, CPC praying for effecting service of summons of the
suit upon the defendant by way of substituted mode, i.e., by way of
newspaper publication. He contended that as a matter of record, the
newspaper publication is on the Trial Court’s record and has been taken note
of by the learned Trial Court even in the impugned order dated 22.11.2024.
He would contend that in view of such overwhelming orders and the
appropriate procedure prescribed in CPC having been followed in its letter
and spirit, the contention that the appellant/defendant was never served
summons of suit is inconceivable.
15. That apart, learned counsel for the respondent also contended that the
recovery suit filed by the respondent/plaintiff being a commercial suit, the
mandatory pre-litigation mediation process was also availed of before
Shahdara District Legal Services Authority (SDLSA) and the notices of the
same were duly served upon the appellant. He contended that in the said
mediation proceedings, the counsel for the appellant/defendant had appeared
and filed his Vakalatnama before the said authority, which is reflected in the
Non-Starter Report dated 30.09.2021. He also contended that the same
counsel had also filed the application under Order IX Rule 13, CPC, which is
the subject matter of the present appeal. In this context, he would contend
that the knowledge of the appellant/defendant that a suit has been filed stands
established, apart from the fact that the notice for appearing in the prelitigation mediation proceedings was in fact served upon the appellant.
16. Additionally, learned counsel for the respondent emphasized that the
service upon appellant/defendant through whatsapp mode has to be held to be
proper service inasmuch as there is no denial that one of the mobile numbers
provided by the respondent/defendant and mentioned on the memo of parties
accompanying the plaint have been admitted to belong to the
appellant/defendant. In fact, the application under Order IX Rule 13, CPC and
the objections filed on behalf of the appellant/defendant to the execution
petition also contain the very same mobile number. Thus, in view of the fact
that the summons were served upon the appellant/defendant and recorded in
the order of the learned Trial Court, there is no plausible explanation as to
why such service would not be deemed to be an effective service in terms of
Order V, CPC. He also submitted that so far as the mentioning of the correct
residential address of the appellant/defendant in the execution proceeding is
concerned, the said information was obtained subsequent to the disposal of
the suit.
17. Drawing support from the reasons stated in the impugned order, learned
counsel invited attention to the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Parimal vs. Veena @ Bharti: (2011) 3 SCC 545 referred to in para 14 of the
impugned order dated 22.11.2024. He would contend that the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has clearly held that the Court shall not set aside a decree on
mere irregularity in the service of summons or in a case where the defendant
had notice of the date and sufficient time to appear in the Court. He urged that
applying the said ratio to the facts noted in the impugned order, leaves no
manner of doubt that the appellant/defendant was indeed served with the
summons of the recovery suit in accordance with the provisions of Order V of
CPC, 1908. In view of the aforesaid, he prayed that the said appeal be
dismissed.
18. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
impugned order as also the records of the case.
19. At the outset, we observe from the order dated 01.02.2022 passed by
the learned Trial Court that the addresses available on the memo of parties
accompanying the plaint were found to be, (i) so far as the property bearing
No.9/6241, Nehru Gali, Subhash Mohalla, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 is
concerned, the process server’s report noted that “Dukan Khali Kar Gaye”
and; (ii) so far as the property bearing No. 10/1308, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi110031 is concerned, the process server’s report noted that “Kutch Pata nahin
chala”. On the said report of the process server, the learned Trial Court had
directed issuance of summons of the suit by way of e-mail, fax, telegram,
signal and whatsapp number and posted the matter to 14.03.2022.
20. On 14.03.2022, the learned Trial Court in its order noted that the
appellant/defendant has been served through whatsapp and e-mail on the basis
that on the process issued on whatsapp mode, blue tick was visible denoting
effective delivery of the summons of the suit on the mobile phone of the
appellant/defendant. However, at the same time, the learned Trial Court also
noted that the Nazarat branch had not informed the appellant/defendant on
phone regarding sending of summons through e-mail nor was it mentioned
whether or not the said e-mail was duly received or had bounced back and
further also noted that the screenshots of the e-mail and whatsapp have not
been annexed to. In view of the fact situation obtaining, on the request of the
counsel for the respondent/plaintiff, a direction for fresh service upon the
defendant was issued to be effected through all modes and the matter was
posted on 11.05.2022. This order indicates that the learned Trial court was not
satisfied with the mode of service.
21. We observe from the order dated 11.05.2022 passed by the learned
Trial Court that the addresses available on the memo of parties accompanying
the plaint were found to be, (i) so far as the property No.9/6241, Nehru Gali,
Subhash Mohalla, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 is concerned, the process
server’s report noted that “Harish Mittal naam ka koi vyakti va M/s. Heena
Overseas naam ki koi bhi firm nahin hain” and (ii) so far as the property
bearing No.10/1308, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 is concerned, the process
server’s report noted that “iss naam se koi vyakti va firm nahni hain”. This
indicates that the appellant/defendant was not served on the addresses which
were mentioned in the memo of parties accompanying the suit plaint. It is
interesting to note that in the same order, counsel for the respondent/plaintiff
mentioned that those were the last known addresses of the defendant and had
sought time for moving appropriate application for substituted service of the
defendant.
22. Subsequently, an application under Order V Rule 20, CPC appears to
have been filed by the respondent and taken up for consideration on
30.05.2022. The learned Trial Court allowed the said application and directed
publication of the summons in the newspaper “The Statesman”.
Simultaneously, the learned Trial Court had also directed issuance of
summons on filing of PF, RC, AD, Speed Post and posted the matter to
22.08.2022.
23. Thereafter, vide order dated 01.12.2022, the learned Trial Court took
note of the service upon the defendant by substituted mode by way of
publication in the “Statesman” in its edition dated 12.06.2022. Upon noting
that the appellant/defendant had not appeared even in the post lunch session
despite service, he was proceeded ex parte. The matter was finally posted on
24.01.2023 for ex parte final arguments of the suit. Apparently, consequent to
hearing the arguments and examining the plaintiff evidence, the judgment and
decree was passed by the learned Trial Court on 17.05.2023.
24. The aforesaid narration of the facts, which are on record of the learned
Trial Court, makes it apparent that the addresses which were made available
by the respondent/plaintiff in the memo of parties accompanying the suit were
not the correct addresses of the appellant/defendant. Merely upon the
statement of the respondent/plaintiff that the said addresses are the last known
addresses of the appellant/defendant, and on the filing of the application under
Order V Rule 20, CPC, the learned Trial Court having allowed service by
substituted mode, would not ipso facto deem to be an effective service in
terms of Order V, CPC. The provisions of service through substituted means
available under Order V Rule 20, CPC is resorted to only as the last resort
when all the previous procedures are found to have failed. We find from the
records that while in the memo of parties accompanying the suit plaint,
incorrect addresses of the appellant/defendant were mentioned, however
surprisingly, in the execution petition filed on 09.04.2024, two correct
addresses which included the residential address of the appellant/defendant as
also the new premises from where the appellant/defendant was conducting its
business were mentioned. In fact, the Bailiff had served the warrants of
attachment upon the appellant/defendant at the so mentioned residential
address.
25. The fact that the new business address i.e., IX/622, Krishna Gali No.2,
Subhash Road, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 was available with the
respondent/plaintiff at the time of filing the execution petition, is intriguing
for the reason that the suit for recovery of monies was predicated on the basis
of invoices on and from the month of July, 2018. The version of the
appellant/defendant that he had sold the premises bearing No.9/6241, Nehru
Gali, Subhash Mohalla, Gandhi Nagar, Delhi-110031 in the month of
February, 2018 and had shifted to the new business address noted above,
immediately thereafter appears to be a plausible explanation as to why the
respondent/plaintiff had the knowledge of the new business address. In fact,
the appellant/defendant has asserted that the business relations post February,
2018, between the parties were continuing from the new business address
which was in the knowledge of the respondent/plaintiff. This aspect appears
to be a plausible explanation which also appears to be sufficient explanation
as to why the appellant/defendant did not appear before the learned Trial
Court and participate in the suit proceedings.
26. If we believe that the respondent/plaintiff had continued its business
relations with the appellant/defendant post February, 2018, coupled with the
fact that the recovery suit was predicated on the invoices from the month of
July, 2018 onwards, having regard to the fact that the suit was filed in
December, 2021, it is verily possible that the respondent/plaintiff had
knowledge of the correct addresses of the appellant/defendant. If that is so,
the mere service by substituted mode under Order V Rule 20, CPC would not
be a sufficient or deemed to be an effective service of the summons of the suit
upon the appellant/defendant. It is so for the reason that the substituted mode
of service is to be availed of only as a last resort and unless the ordinary mode
as prescribed in Order V, CPC till service through affixation under Order V
Rule 17, CPC is exhausted, the defendant cannot be deemed to be served in
accordance with law.
27. So far as the argument predicated on service through whatsapp mode is
concerned, we find that the learned Trial Court itself in the order dated
14.03.2022 had doubted the veracity of the same and had in fact directed
issuance of fresh service by all ordinary and permissible modes. Having
regard thereto, the said contention is not only unpersuasive but unmerited and
thus stands rejected.
28. Learned counsel for the respondent/plaintiff had also argued that the
knowledge of the filing of the suit for recovery can also be gathered from the
fact that a counsel had appeared on behalf of the appellant/defendant in the
pre-litigation mediation proceedings. This argument also is unmerited for the
reason that mere participation in the pre-litigation mediation is neither here
nor there. In that, it is not necessary that consequent upon failure of such prelitigation mediation proceedings, a plaintiff may necessarily institute a suit. It
may be possible in certain situations that a party may choose not to pursue its
legal remedies. Merely because a party has instituted pre-litigation mediation
would not be a guarantee that it would be followed by the said party filing a
suit for its claims. Moreover, the procedure for service of summons of a suit
upon the defendant is prescribed by the procedure envisaged in Order V of
CPC, 1908. Therefore, whether service of a summons has been effected upon
a defendant in accordance with the provisions of Order V, CPC has to be
necessarily gathered from the evidence that is brought on record through the
process server or postal receipts and other modes validly prescribed under
Order V, CPC. Thus, the said contention of the respondent holds no water
and is rejected.
29. So far as the ratio laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Neerja
Realtors (supra) is concerned, there is no quarrel on the proposition of law. In
Neerja Realtors (supra), it was held that before a Civil Court proceeds to
press into service the provisions of Order V Rule 20, CPC, the mode of
service by affixation as prescribed in Order V Rule 17, CPC ought to be
exhausted. In the case before the Hon’ble Supreme Court, service by ordinary
mode, for some reason or the other, was not effected upon the defendant
therein. It was in such circumstances that the Hon’ble Supreme Court held
that prior to resorting to the remedy of service by substituted mode, service by
affixation under Order V Rule 17, CPC ought to be satisfied. It is pertinent to
note that in Neerja Realtors (supra), there was no misdescription or
incorrectness in the address of the defendant therein. However, in the present
case, the moot issue and undeniable fact is that the addresses of the
appellant/defendant as mentioned in the memo of parties accompanying the
suit plaint were incorrect and therefore, even if the mode of service prescribed
under Order V Rule 17, CPC had been employed, the same would have been
futile. Thus, though the ratio of Neerja Realtors (supra) holds the field
however, may not applicable to the facts of the present case. With due respect,
it need not be reiterated that judgements are not to be applied as Euclid’s
Theorem de hors the consideration as to whether the same would apply to a
particular fact situation. In our humble opinion, the ratio in Neerja Realtors
(supra) is inapplicable to the facts of the present case.
30. In view of the observations made herein above, the order dated
22.11.2024 is set aside and the matter is remanded back to the learned Trial
Court for fresh adjudication on the application under Order IX Rule 13, CPC
filed by the appellant. Further, we direct that that till a decision is taken on the
application of the appellant by the learned Trial Court, the ex parte judgement
and decree dated 17.05.2023 shall remain stayed.
31. It is also directed that the deposit so made by the appellant of the 50%
decretal amount before this Court be transferred to the learned Trial Court,
who may invest the said amount in interest bearing FDR, for a period as per
its discretion.

32. In view of the above, the appeal stands disposed of with pending
applications if any, without any order as to costs. 