Court: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: 1815/2025
DATE: 16.12.2025
PLAINTIFF: M/s Logical Engineers Pvt. Ltd.
DEFENDENT: Rahul Kamra
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Amit Bansal

-------JUDGEMENT--------
1. The present petition has been filed under Section 11(6) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (‘Act’) seeking appointment of a
Sole Arbitrator for the adjudication of the disputes between the parties
arising out of a Parking Lot Operation Agreement dated 30th July, 2021
(‘Agreement’) entered into between the parties. As per the terms of the
Agreement, the respondent was granted license to operate the parking lot on
a monthly license fee of Rs. 3,09,322/- plus GST for a period of five years
from 1st July, 2025 to 30th June, 2024.
2. Counsel for the petitioner submits that the Agreement contains an
arbitration clause, i.e. Clause 17, which provides for adjudication of any
disputes arising between the parties by way of arbitration. For ease of
reference, Clause 17 of the Agreement is set out below:This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
3. Counsel appears on behalf of the respondent.
4. An earlier commercial suit filed by the petitioner herein seeking
eviction and recovery of license fees before the Rohini Courts, Delhi. An
application was filed on behalf of the respondent under Order VII Rule 11 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) in which the stand taken by the
respondent was that the suit filed by the petitioner herein is not maintainable
in view of an arbitration clause contained in the Agreement between the
parties.This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
5. In light of the aforesaid objection taken, the petitioner withdrew the
said suit with liberty to initiate arbitration proceedings.
6. Subsequently, the petitioner issued a notice dated 9th September, 2025
to the respondent invoking the aforesaid arbitration clause under Section 21
of the Act. However, the respondent failed to respond to the aforesaid
notice. Hence, the petitioner has been constrained to approach this Court by
way of the present petition.
7. Accordingly, the disputes between the parties under the Agreement
are referred to the Arbitral Tribunal comprising a Sole Arbitrator.
8. Justice (Retd.) Mohammad Rafiq, (Mobile No. +91-9414055777) is
appointed as a Sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties.
9. The following directions are issued in this regard:
a. The arbitral proceedings shall be held under the aegis of the Delhi
International Arbitration Centre, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah Road,
New Delhi (hereinafter ‘DIAC’).
b. The remuneration of the Arbitrator shall be in terms of DIAC
(Administrative Cost and Arbitrators’ Fees) Rules, 2018.
c. The Arbitrator is requested to furnish a declaration in terms of Section
12 of the Act prior to entering into the reference. In the event there is
any impediment to the Arbitrator’s appointment on that count, the
parties are given liberty to file an appropriate application before this
Court.
d. The parties shall approach the Arbitrator within two (2) weeks from
today.
10. It is made clear that all the rights and contentions of the parties,
including the arbitrability of any of the claims and/ or counter claims, anyThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
other preliminary objections as well as claims on merits of the dispute of
either of the parties, are left open for adjudication by the Arbitrator.
11. The petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
12. Needless to state, nothing in this order shall be construed as an
expression of this Court on the merits of the case.
AMIT BANSAL, J
DECEMBER 16, 2025
RzuThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 20/12/2025 at 12:26:05