COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Commercial Suit
CASE_NO: CM(M) 926/2025 & CM APPL. 30278/2025
DATE: 10.11.2025
PLAINTIFF: SHREE BALAJEE ENTERPRISES AND ANR 
DEFENDANT: MAHASHIAN DI HATTI (MDH) PVT LTD
JUDGE: Justice GIRISH KATHPALIA

----JUDGMENT-----

This petition, brought under Article 227 of the Constitution of India
assails dismissal of application that was filed by the defendants (petitioners
herein) under the provisions of Order VII Rule 11 CPC in the commercial
suit for recovery of money. I have heard learned counsel for both sides.
2. The circumstances relevant for present purposes are briefly narrated
below.
2.1 The plaintiff company (respondent herein), engaged in production
and sale of spices from its registered office in Kirti Nagar, New Delhi filed a
commercial suit against the present petitioners/defendants for recovery of
Rs.44,88,637.03 with pendente lite and future interest, pleading as follows.
The respondent/plaintiff and the petitioners/defendants are engaged in
business of spices for past several years, the former supplying the spices to
the latter. Based on invoices issued in the month of April 2022, the
respondent/plaintiff supplied spices to the petitioners/defendants for a total
consideration of Rs.1,41,84,890/-, out of which the petitioners/defendants
made part payment of Rs.96,96,252.97, leaving the balance due to the tune
of Rs.44,88,637.03. But despite repeated requests of the respondent/plaintiff
and demand notice dated 06.07.2022, the petitioners/defendants did not pay
the balance amount. The relevant paragraphs of the plaint, dealing with the
issue of cause of action and territorial jurisdiction are extracted below:
“11. That the cause of action for filing the present suit arose in favour
of the plaintiff company and against the defendants on 18.04.2022 and
20.04.2022 when the Plaintiff company, upon the request of the
defendants, issued the Invoices and supplied the spices accordingly to
the defendants. The cause of action further arose when, on the request
of the Defendants, the Plaintiff Company dispatched the requested
spices and the Defendants accordingly cleared the part payment to the
tune of Rs 96,96,252. 97 /- (Rupees Ninety Six Lacs Ninety Six
Thousand Two Hundred Fifty Two and Ninety Seven Paisa Only) in
favour of the Plaintiff Company. The cause of action further arose as
the Plaintiff Company has been maintaining the regular ledger
account of the Defendants and the total amount for the delivered
requested goods/ spices was Rs 1,41,84,890/- (Rupees One Crore
Fourty One Lacs Eighty Four Thousand Eight Hundred Ninety Only)
and the Plaintiff Company has only received the part payment to the
tune of Rs 96,96,252.97 /(Rupees Ninety Six Lacs Ninety Six Thousand
Two Hundred Fifty Two and Ninety Seven Paisa Only), hence the
remaining balance is Rs 44,88,637.03/- (Rupees Fourty Four Lacs
Eighty Eight Thousand Six Hundred Thirty Seven and Three Paisa
Only) towards the delivered spices. The cause of action further arose
in the last week of May 2022, when the Plaintiff Company contacted
the defendants and requested them to clear the aforementioned
balance remaining payment qua the spices which have been delivered
to them whereupon, the defendants promised/assured the Plaintiff
Company to clear the balance remaining sum of Rs 44,88,637.03/-
(Rupees Fourty Four Lacs Eighty Eight Thousand Six Hundred Thirty
Seven and Three Paisa Only) within the period of 15 days. The cause
of action is still continuing as the defendants till date have not cleared
the balance remaining amount of Rs 44,88,637.03/- (Rupees Fourty
Four Lacs Eighty Eight Thousand Six Hundred Thirty Seven and
Three Paisa Only), towards the goods/articles delivered to the
defendant and the defendants have been utilizing the same in their
own whims and wish.
12. That this Hon'ble court has the necessary jurisdiction to entertain
and try the present suit under Section 20 (c) of the Code of Procedure
1908, as a part of the cause of action has arisen within the jurisdiction
of this Hon'ble court.
a) That the cause of action arose in Delhi as the spices/goods/articles
have been dispatched from the Registered office of the Plaintiff
Company situated at Kirti Nagar, New Delhi.
b) That the Plaintiff company to the present suit has its Registered
Office at Delhi also and works for gain in Delhi.”
2.2 The petitioners/defendants filed Written Statement on 06.05.2023,
followed by Counterclaim on 17.07.2023, pleading that they are not liable to
pay any money and rather deserve a Counterclaim. In their Written
Statement, the petitioners/defendants admitted that the respondent/plaintiff
is engaged in business of production and sale of spices for past several years
and has its registered office in Kirti Nagar, Delhi. The petitioners/defendants
in the Written Statement also admitted having made part payment of
Rs.96,96,252.97 to the respondent/plaintiff but further submitted that they
had to recover more than Rs.46,00,000/- from the respondent/plaintiff
towards a scheme. In response to pleadings of the respondent/plaintiff
related to cause of action and territorial jurisdiction, petitioners/defendants
pleaded as follows:
“11. That the contents of para no.11 of the plaint do not constitute the
cause of action for filing that present suit. The Plaintiff had sent the
goods in April, 2022 to the defendants from Faridabad and not from
Delhi as alleged. The cause of action mentioned in the para under
reply is nothing but a mere formality of mentioning the cause of action
in the plaint. The cause of action as alleged is false, flimsy and
baseless, hence denied.
12. That the contents of para no.12 of the plaint are also wrong and
denied as no cause of action ever arose for filing the present suit in
Delhi. This Hon'ble Court has no territorial jurisdiction to try and
entertain the present suit. The mere fact that the registered office of
the plaintiff is situated in Delhi cannot be considered as the valid
point for conferment of territorial jurisdiction on this Hon'ble Court.”
2.3 On the basis of rival pleadings, the learned trial court framed the
following issues on 31.10.2023:
“1. Whether this Court has jurisdiction to try and entertain the
present suit? OPP
2. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to recovery of Rs.44.88,637.03/-. ?
OPP
3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to interest on Rs. 44.88,637.03/-. If
so at what rate and for what period? OPP
4. Relief.”
2.4 Subsequent to the evidence led by respondent/plaintiff, application
under Order VII Rule 11 CPC was filed by the petitioners/defendants
claiming that since no cause of action arose within the territorial jurisdiction
of Delhi courts, the plaint was liable to be rejected. It would be significant to
record that alleging lack of territorial jurisdiction, the application not just
invoked the provision under Order VII Rule 11 CPC, but even in the prayer
clause, the petitioners/defendants sought rejection (and not return) of plaint.
The respondent/plaintiff filed a detailed reply to the said application.
2.5 After hearing both sides, learned trial court dismissed the application
of the petitioners/defendants by way of the impugned order, observing that
pertaining to the territorial jurisdiction of the court, an issue had already
been framed on 31.10.2023; that the petitioners/defendants in their Written
Statement had admitted about registered office of the respondent/plaintiff
being in Kirti Nagar, New Delhi, from where the parties were engaged in
correspondence with each other; that the respondent/plaintiff had specifically
pleaded in the plaint that the goods in question had been dispatched from
Kirti Nagar, New Delhi, which was not denied in the Written Statement and
following the principle of “debtor seeks the creditor”, Delhi Court has
territorial jurisdiction; and that the respondent/plaintiff had placed on record
a bank certificate to show that the petitioners/defendants had made part
payment in the Current Account of the respondent/plaintiff in Kirti Nagar
Branch of State Bank of India, which fact was not denied. The learned trial
court also dealt with the contention of learned counsel for
petitioners/defendants as regards taking on record the above mentioned bank
certificate.
3. Hence, the present petition, assailing dismissal of the application
under Order VII Rule 11 CPC.
4. In order to ensure compliance in letter and spirit of order dated
10.10.2025 of the Supreme Court in SLP No.28519/2025 (copy whereof was
placed before me in late evening of 06.11.2025), final arguments were heard
and concluded on 07.11.2025, reserving the matter for judgment. In order
dated 07.11.2025, the rival arguments and contentions were recorded in
presence of counsel for both sides and the same are extracted below:
“4. In this second call in post-lunch session, final arguments have
been heard from both sides. Since due to pending board, writing an
oral order would not be possible, for convenience, arguments and
contentions of both sides are noted as follows.
4.1 Learned counsel for petitioners has argued that the document
relied upon by the trial court as a bank certificate was wrongly relied
upon because no leave under Order XI Rule 1 (5) CPC was obtained.
It is further argued that the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC
can be filed at any stage of proceedings and even subsequent to
commencement of trial. It is contended that in the counter-claim itself,
the present petitioners had pleaded that if the suit gets dismissed on
issue of territorial jurisdiction, the present petitioners would withdraw
the counter-claim. It is also argued by learned counsel for petitioners
that after filing of the bank certificate, the plaint ought to have been
amended and that having not been done, the impugned order is bad in
law. Finally, it is contended that the plaint and the documents do not
reflect any cause of action in Delhi. No other argument has been
advanced on behalf of petitioners.
4.2 On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent/plaintiff argued
that the trial court has already framed an issue on territorial
jurisdiction, so there is nothing wrong in the impugned order. It is
contended that in the written statement, the present petitioners
categorically admitted (pdf 127) that the present respondent has a
registered office in New Delhi and they have also admitted (pdf 132)
that part payment was made to the present respondent in Delhi, which
stands established from the bank certificate in question. Further,
reading pdf 133 which also forms part of the written statement,
learned counsel for respondent contends that the present petitioners
categorically admitted their liability to pay the suit amount to the
present respondent. It is argued that entire evidence of plaintiff stands
concluded but not a single question was asked to any witness
challenging territorial jurisdiction and even no suggestion to that
effect was put. It is also argued that part payment was made by the
present petitioners through RTGS in the Delhi account of the present
respondent and this fact remains not challenged even in crossexamination of plaintiff’s witnesses. In this regard, learned counsel
for respondent places reliance on the judgments of coordinate
benches of this Court in the case of M/s Auto Movers vs. Luminous
Power Technologies Pvt. Ltd., [CM(M) 604/2020] decided on
16.09.2021 and in the case of RT Construction vs. Kotec Automotive
Services India Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. [I.A. 19709/2022 in CS(COMM)
291/2022] decided on 11.08.2023. Learned counsel for respondent
contends that the bank certificate was filed simply to corroborate the
admission of the present petitioners in the Written Statement as
regards the part-payment made in Delhi. Besides, learned counsel for
respondent also takes me through record to contend that the
petitioners have been trying to protract the proceedings by way of
repeated adjournments and adverse orders for which cost was
imposed multiple times. It is also pointed out that even the court fees
on the counter-claim was paid after prolonged delay. The contention
is that application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC was filed only to
further protract the proceedings.
4.3 Learned counsel for petitioners addressed rebuttal arguments,
which are primarily repetition of the main arguments. It is contended
that the adjournments taken by the petitioners before the trial court
were never opposed by the present respondent. Learned counsel for
petitioners reiterated that in the plaint, there is no averment at all
reflecting any part-payment in Delhi. As regards paragraph 12 of the
plaint (pleading that the goods were supplied from Delhi) and the
corresponding reply in the Written Statement, learned counsel for
petitioners contends that such bald averment cannot be read in
isolation.
5. Accordingly, final arguments stand concluded. Judgment
reserved.”
5. To recapitulate, claim of the petitioners/defendants is that Delhi courts
lack territorial jurisdiction to entertain the subject suit. On that count, what
the petitioners/defendants seek is not return of the plaint, to be filed in the
court of competent jurisdiction. The petitioners/defendants seek rejection of
plaint on that ground. It is trite that merely because wrong provision of law
is invoked, the application cannot be dismissed; the court must examine the
content of the application and the relief sought. In the present case, it is not
just that the petitioners/defendants invoked the provisions under Order VII
Rule 11 CPC instead of Order VII Rule 10 CPC, the petitioners/defendants
even in the prayer clause of the application sought rejection and not return of
the plaint. It is not a case where the plaint does not raise any cause of action.
The petitioners/defendants also do not claim that there is no cause of action
at all. What the petitioners/defendants claim is that in Delhi there is no cause
of action. That is the reason, the trial court based on the rival pleadings
framed a specific issue as to whether the subject suit falls within territorial
jurisdiction of Delhi courts. Even if the respondent/plaintiff fails to prove
during trial that the cause of action arose in Delhi, the consequence would be
return of the plaint and not rejection thereof.
6. As mentioned above, the respondent/plaintiff has placed reliance on
certificate dated 19.04.2025 issued by the Chief Manager of State Bank of
India, Kirti Nagar Branch, New Delhi, certifying that two payments, to the
total tune of Rs.70,00,000/- were received by them in Kirti Nagar Branch
account of the respondent/plaintiff from the petitioners/defendants. The
evidentiary value of that certificate cannot be tested while deciding the
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC.
6.1 In this regard, contention of learned counsel for petitioners/defendants
that the trial court could not have placed reliance on the said document
because no leave under Order XI Rule 1(5) CPC was obtained; and that after
filing thereof, plaint should have been amended before placing reliance on
the same, fails to inspire confidence. The said provision of the Code does
not stipulate a blanket ban on filing of the additional documents by plaintiff
after filing of the plaint. What sub-rule (5) of Rule 1 of Order XI of the Code
stipulates is that such additional documents cannot be taken on record except
with the leave of the court, and that such leave shall be granted only upon
the plaintiff establishing a reasonable cause for non-disclosure about that
document. The Code contemplates neither any requirement of filing a
written application for such leave nor any specific format of such leave in
the order of the trial court. There is no bar against making an oral request in
that regard and the trial court taking such additional documents on record on
being satisfied about reasonableness of the cause explained for nondisclosure of that document.
6.2 As mentioned above, the suit was filed on 05.09.2022 while the said
bank certificate is dated 19.04.2025. In other words, when the suit was filed,
the bank certificate was not even in existence and consequently not in
power, possession, control or custody of the respondent/plaintiff. In
paragraph 17 of the impugned order, the learned trial court elaborated the
circumstances which justify taking the said bank certificate on record. It
would be apposite to extract paragraph 17 of the impugned order, which is
as follows:
“17. The main contention raised by Ld. Counsel for defendant is that
plaintiff cannot be permitted to place on record this document i.e.
bank certificate dated 19.04.2025. The present suit was filed on
14.09.2022. After issuance of summons, none appeared on behalf of
defendant and defendant was proceeded ex-parte and ex-parte order
was set aside on 06.05.2024. Thereafter, the defendant has filed
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC. During arguments, Ld.
Counsel for plaintiff sought some time to show that this court has
jurisdiction to try and entertain the present suit as defendant has
made payment in the bank account of plaintiff situated within the
jurisdiction of this court. Moreover, if this contention of Ld. Counsel
for defendant is accepted even then plaintiff can prove this document
during evidence. I am of the view that the defendant has filed the
present application u/o VII Rule 11 CPC only to delay the trial of the
present suit.”
6.3 Therefore, I am of the considered view that there was no error in the
learned trial court taking on record the bank certificate, which would be
proved by the respondent/plaintiff in accordance with law.
7. It is trite that while dealing with an application under Order VII Rule
11 CPC, the court must read the plaint as a whole, taking into consideration
the content and not just form of the pleadings. At the cost of repetition, it
needs to be kept in mind that the respondent/plaintiff specifically pleaded
that its registered office is in Delhi and the petitioners/defendants made part
payment in Kirti Nagar Branch, New Delhi account of respondent/plaintiff
with State Bank of India. In similar circumstances, the coordinate benches of
this court in the cases of Auto Movers (supra) and R.T. Construction (supra)
after detailed discussion held that since on account of part payment in Delhi,
cause of action partly arose in Delhi, courts in Delhi do not lack territorial
jurisdiction to try the suit.
8. Most importantly, as mentioned above, in paragraph 12 of the plaint
the respondent/plaintiff specifically pleaded that cause of action arose in
Delhi because the spices were dispatched from registered office of
respondent/plaintiff in Kirti Nagar, New Delhi. Respondent/plaintiff cannot
be deprived of an opportunity to prove this averment. As such, return (much
less rejection) of plaint in such situation would not be permissible.
9. To reiterate, according to respondent/plaintiff, the goods were
supplied from Delhi and even part payments by petitioners/defendants were
done in Delhi; so, it cannot be said that for the purposes of return (much less
rejection) of plaint, Delhi courts lack territorial jurisdiction. Therefore, I find
no infirmity in the impugned order.
10. There is another aspect. As mentioned above, the learned trial court
has already framed a specific issue on the territorial jurisdiction of Delhi
courts, and the trial is at its fag end.
10.1 Of course, the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC can be filed
at any stage. But where the trial is reaching culmination, would it not be
better if the suit is decided on merits-based trial.
10.2 In this regard, legal position was elucidated by the Supreme Court in
the case titled M/s Bhagya Estate Benchers Pvt. Ltd. vs Narne Estates Pvt.
Ltd., Civil Appeal No.4570 of 2023 decided on 11.09.2024, holding thus:
“12. The above position holds good as we are not of the opinion that
issuance of summons shall foreclose the right of the defendant to seek
rejection of plaint; but the focal issue for consideration is that till when
and for how long can this right of the defendant survive?
13. It is amply clear that the purpose behind such a provision is to
ensure that the plaints or petitions which are defective, for any of the
reasons enumerated, shall not be allowed to proceed further and shall
be put to an end before they progress to an advanced stage. When such
is the purpose, we fail to understand as to how an application for
rejection of a plaint can be entertained at a stage where written
submission has already been filed, evidence has been led and the trial
has substantially reached the stage of final arguments, as in the present
case. This would rather go completely against the objective of the
provision and would effectively not serve the purpose which it intended
to.
14. Moreover, when the proceedings have reached such an
advanced stage of trial and the Court has gone through the merits of
the case, it is fair to presume that the Court has already applied its
mind to the substantive submissions and cannot make a prima facie
conclusion about a plaint being improper at the outset or not. Also, it is
a settled position of law that when the court is considering an
application under Order VII Rule 11, it must only peruse and consider
the averments in the plaint to check whether the plaint is defective for
any of the reasons provided under the rule or is a proper plaint. Since
the plaint is the only material to be considered while deciding an
application seeking rejection of plaint, then in a case where plaint has
been registered, written submission has been filed, evidence has been
recorded, and the parties are ready for final arguments, it is only
natural that some form of bias or opinion regarding the merits of the
case would crop up in the mind of the court. In such a scenario, looking
at the plaint in isolation and deciding the rejection application based
solely on prima facie reading of the plaint would not be possible. At this
point, the trial has rather fructified to a stage where the dismissal of a
suit on merits is a more appropriate course of action instead of
rejecting a plaint at the outset which should have been done at a
preliminary stage.
15. It is already a clarified position of law that without disposing of
an application under Order VII Rule 11, CPC, the court cannot
proceed with the trial. When this is the position of law and the purpose
of the provision is also settled, then, we see no reason for the right of
the defendant to raise such a plea at a far belated stage such as final
arguments or nearing conclusion of the trial. Allowing such pleas to be
raised after the trial has proceeded so far would not only defeat the
intent of the provision but would also go against the principle of equity
and would lead to wastage of the court resources. Additionally,
allowing such rights to survive till eternity only act as a catalyst for the
defendant to misuse the provision to law.”
10.3 In the present case, the subject suit was filed by respondent/plaintiff
on 05.09.2022 and the Written Statement by petitioners/defendants was filed
on 06.05.2023, while the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC was filed
much belatedly on 07.04.2025, that too despite the trial court having framed
specific issue on territorial jurisdiction.
10.4 Not only this, prior to filing the application under Order VII Rule 11
CPC, the petitioners/defendants also filed a Counterclaim on 17.07.2023.
One wonders, if the petitioners/defendants genuinely believed that Delhi
courts have no territorial jurisdiction, why would they file Counterclaim in
the same court. As noted above, trial is at almost fag end, and after
analyzing the record, the learned trial court has recorded explicit findings
that the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC was filed by petitioners/
defendants only to delay the trial.
11. In view of the aforesaid, I am unable to find any infirmity, much less
perversity in the impugned order that would call for intervention by this
court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. The present petition is
not just devoid of merit, but also totally frivolous, filed with oblique
purposes of protracting the proceedings to frustrate the respondent/plaintiff
into giving up its claim. Therefore, this petition and the accompanying
application are dismissed with costs of Rs.25,000/- to be paid by the
petitioners/defendants to the respondent/plaintiff within one week from
today. 
