COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: ARB.P. 2008/2025
DATE: 24th December, 2025
PLAINTIFF: M/s Mia Construction Pvt. Ltd.
DEFENDENT: Public Works Department, Govt. of NCT of Delhi
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Jasmeet Singh

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This is a petition filed under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 seeking appointment of an Arbitrator for
adjudication of disputes between the parties.
2. The brief facts are that the petitioner participated in the percentage
rate tender for the work of “Strengthening of road from Western
Yamuna Canal to Bawana under Sub-Division NR-15, North Roads
Division, PWD, Delhi” and was declared as the successful bidder.
3. Subsequently, the respondent department issued an Acceptance Letter
dated 24.06.2023 in favour of the petitioner. Later, the parties entered
into an Agreement for execution of the work.
4. The said Agreement contains an arbitration clause being Clause No.
25 of the General Conditions of Contract (“GCC”), which reads as
under:-This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15“CLAUSE 25
Settlement of Disputes by Conciliation and Arbitration
Except where otherwise provided in the contract, all questions
and disputes relating to the meaning of the specifications,
designs, drawings and instructions here-in before mentioned
and as to the quality of workmanship or materials used in the
work or as to any other question, claim, right, matter or thing
whatsoever in any way arising out of or relating to the
contract, designs, drawings, specifications, estimates,
instructions, orders or otherwise concerning the works or the
execution or failure to execute the same whether arising
during the progress of the work or after the cancellation,
termination, completion or abandonment thereof shall be dealt
with as mentioned hereinafter:
25.1 Conciliation: If the contractor considers any work
demanded of him to be outside the requirements of the
contract, or disputes any drawings, record or decision given in
writing by the Engineer-in-Charge or if the Engineer-in-
Charge considers any act or decision of the contractor on any
matter in connection with or arising out of the contract or
carrying out of the work to be unacceptable and is disputed;
such party may promptly refer such disputes and amount
claimed for each dispute to the Conciliator (Special Director
General or the Additional Director General concerned with
the work, as applicable) in the proforma prescribed in
Appendix XVII mentioned in Schedule F, under intimation toThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15the other party. The Conciliator may then request each party
to submit to him a brief written statement describing the
disputes and the points at issue. Each party shall send a copy
of such statement to the other party. At any stage of the
conciliation proceedings, the Conciliator may request a party
to submit to him such additional information as he deems
appropriate. When it appears to the Conciliator that there
exist elements of a settlement which may be acceptable to the
parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement
and submit them to the parties for their observations. After
receiving the observations of the parties, he may reformulate
the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such
observations. If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of
the disputes, they may draw up and sign a written settlement
agreement on non-judicial stamp paper as per Stamp Act. The
Conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and
furnish a copy thereof to each party. The termination of
conciliation proceedings shall be in accordance with Section
76 of The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. No party
shall be represented before the said Conciliator by an
advocate or legal counsel. The conciliation proceedings shall
be completed within 45 days from the receipt of reference. This
time may be enlarged by 15 days by the Conciliator. The
conciliation proceedings shall be deemed to have been
terminated at the end of 60 days from the receipt of reference.
25.2 Arbitration: If the aforesaid conciliation proceedings failThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15or the conciliator fails to give proposal for settlement within
the aforesaid period, either party may promptly give notice in
the proforma prescribed in Appendix XVIII, under intimation
to the other party, to the Chief Engineer or the Superintending
Engineer concerned with the work (as applicable), hereinafter
referred to as the Arbitrator Appointing Authority as indicated
in Schedule F for appointment of Arbitrator. However, a party
may seek appointment of Arbitrator without taking recourse to
the process of conciliation mentioned in sub clause 25.1
above.
In the event of either party giving a notice to the Arbitrator
Appointing Authority for appointment of Arbitrator, the said
authority shall appoint Arbitrator as per the procedure given
below and refer such disputes to arbitration.
(a) Number of Arbitrators: If the contract amount is less than
Rs. 100 crores, the disputes may be referred for adjudication
by a sole Arbitrator. If the contract amount is Rs 100 crores or
more, the disputes may be referred to an Arbitral Tribunal of
three Arbitrators.
(b) Qualifications of Arbitrators: It is a term of this contact
that each member of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be a Graduate
Engineer with experience in execution of public works
engineering contracts and he should have worked earlier at a
level not lower than the Chief Engineer (equivalent to level of
Joint Secretary to the Government of India).
The aforesaid educational qualification and work experienceThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15shall be mandatory for appointment as Arbitrator.
The age of the Arbitrator at the time of appointment shall not
exceed 70 years. An Arbitrator may be appointed
notwithstanding the total number of active arbitration cases
with him.
(c) Parties to select Arbitrator: Based on the criteria specified
above, a list of empanelled Arbitrators has been prepared in
CPWD and the parties shall have the option to select an
Arbitrator from the list sent to them.
25.3 Appointment of Sole Arbitrator: The parties may opt for
appointment of the Arbitrator of the Ministry of Housing and
Urban Affairs. In such cases, the party seeking arbitration has
to submit an express agreement in writing as per Appendix
XIX towards the waiver of Section 12(5) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 along with the notice for appointment
of Arbitrator in the proforma prescribed in Appendix XVIII,
under intimation to the other party. The Arbitrator Appointing
Authority shall, within 30 days of receipt of the said notice,
appoint Arbitrator of the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Affairs as Arbitrator in the matter, provided the other party
also submits a waiver of Section 12(5), ibid in Appendix XIX
within 7 days of the receipt of the said notice.
Where any one of the parties does not opt for the Arbitrator of
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs or does not submit
the waiver agreement, the Arbitrator Appointing Authority
shall propose five Arbitrators from the list of CPWDThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15empanelled Arbitrators to the party seeking arbitration under
intimation to the other party within 15 days of receiving the
notice. The party seeking arbitration shall give his choice for
one of them within 15 days of receiving the list and the
Arbitrator Appointing Authority shall appoint the chosen
person as the Sole Arbitrator within 15 days of the receipt of
choice.
It is a term of this arbitration agreement that if the parties fail
to select, within the period prescribed above, an Arbitrator of
their choice from the list of CPWD Empanelled Arbitrators
forwarded to them, the Arbitrator Appointing Authority shall
himself select and appoint Arbitrator from the said list.
25.4 Appointment of Arbitral Tribunal of Three Arbitrators:
The Arbitrator Appointing Authority shall prepare two
separate lists of five Arbitrators each from the list of CPWD
Empanelled Arbitrators and send one to the party seeking
arbitration and other to the responding party within 15 days of
the receipt of notice. The parties will then choose any one
Arbitrator from the list provided to them within 15 days of
receipt of the list. The Arbitrator Appointing Authority shall
then appoint those chosen by the respective parties as
Arbitrators and also a third Arbitrator from the list of CPWD
Empanelled Arbitrators to act as presiding Arbitrator, within
15 days of receipt of choice from both the parties.
It is a term of this arbitration agreement that if the parties fail
to select within the period prescribed above, an Arbitrator ofThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15their choice from the list of CPWD Empanelled Arbitrators
forwarded to them, the Arbitrator Appointing Authority shall
himself select and appoint Arbitrator from the said list.
25.5 Applicable Law: The provisions of Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (Act 26 of 1996) and any further
statutory modification or re-enactment thereof shall be
applicable. Further, the fast-track procedure for arbitration
contained in Section 29B of the said Act shall apply.
25.6 Fee Applicable to Arbitrator(s): The fee applicable to the
arbitral tribunal shall be as per CPWD OM No.
2/2006/SE(TLC)/CSQ/137 dated 19.11.2019 (or latest
amendment) and shall be shared equally by both the parties.
25.7 Place of Arbitration: The place of arbitration shall
preferably be as mentioned in Schedule F. However, the
Arbitral Tribunal may decide the place in consultation with
both the parties.
25.8 Terms of reference: The Arbitral Tribunal shall
adjudicate on only such disputes as are referred to it by the
Arbitrator Appointing Authority and give separate award
against each dispute referred to him and shall give reasons for
the award in all cases where the total amount of the claim by
any party exceeds Rs. 1,00,000.
25.9 Interest on Arbitration Award: It is also a term of this
arbitration agreement that where the Arbitral Award against
any dispute is for the payment of money, no pre-suit and
pendente lite interest shall be payable on any part of theThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15Arbitral Award.”
5. Since disputes arose between the parties, the petitioner invoked
arbitration vide legal notice dated 27.08.2025 and thereafter, filed the
present petition.
6. Mr. Kumar, learned Panel Counsel for the respondent, states that the
petitioner has not undertaken conciliation proceeding as provided
under Clause No. 25 of the GCC.
7. I am unable agree with the same. A perusal of the petitioner’s letter
dated 04.07.2025 shows that the petitioner wrote to the Executive
Engineer of the respondent department under Clause No. 25.1 of the
GCC. The said letter is extracted below:-This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:158. The respondent department vide letter dated 14.07.2025 replied to the
petitioner’s letter and requested the petitioner to approach the
competent authority i.e., Principal Chief Engineer (M&F) for
resolving its disputes. Consequently, the petitioner addressed a letter
dated 15.07.2025 to the Chief Engineer North (M) of the respondent
department requesting for resolving of disputes and appointment of
arbitrator.
9. Since the petitioner did not receive any reply from the respondent
department it invoked arbitration vide legal notice dated 27.08.2025.
10. Later, the respondent department vide letter dated 09.09.2025 replied
to the petitioner’s letter dated 15.07.2025 and rejected all the claims
of the petitioner.
11. From the above said facts, it is clear that the petitioner duly made an
attempt for conciliation and however, the same did not fructify.
12. Mr. Kumar, learned Panel Counsel for the respondent states that in the
present case the arbitration clause is not in dispute.
13. Both the parties are ad idem that there is an arbitration clause and
there are disputes pending between the parties.
14. I am satisfied that there exists a valid arbitration clause and there are
disputes between the parties which need to be adjudicated through the
arbitral mechanism.
15. The arbitration clause (as reproduced above) mandates the
qualification of the arbitrator in Clause No. 25.2(b) of the GCC.
16. For the said reasons, the petition is allowed and the following
directions are issued:-
i) The Delhi International Arbitration Centre, Delhi High Court,This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15Sher Shah Road, New Delhi (hereinafter, referred to as the
‘DIAC’) shall appoint the Sole Arbitrator (in accordance with
the required qualification under the arbitration clause) to
adjudicate the disputes between the parties.
ii) The arbitration will be held under the aegis and rules of the
DIAC.
iii) The remuneration of the learned Arbitrator shall be in terms of
DIAC (Administrative Cost and Arbitrators’ Fees) Rules,
2018.
iv) The learned Arbitrator is requested to furnish a declaration in
terms of Section 12 of the Act prior to entering into the
reference.
v) It is made clear that all the rights and contentions of the
parties, including as to the arbitrability of any of the claim, any
other preliminary objection, as well as claims/counter-claims
and merits of the dispute of either of the parties, are left open
for adjudication by the learned arbitrator.
vi) The parties shall approach the learned Arbitrator within two
weeks from appointment of the Arbitrator.
17. The present petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
JASMEET SINGH, J
DECEMBER 24, 2025 / (MS)This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 03/01/2026 at 11:36:15