COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: ARB.P. 2111/2025
DATE: 22nd December, 2025
PLAINTIFF: M/s Kisan Construction Co., Hisar
DEFENDENT: Union of India
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Subramonium Prasad

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This Petition has been filed under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 seeking appointment of an Arbitrator to adjudicate
upon the disputes which have arisen between the parties under the Contract
Agreement dated 07.01.2021.
2. It is stated that under the said Agreement, the Petitioner herein was
entrusted with the work of Construction of Road Under Bridges in lieu of L-
xing No. 49/C at Km 8215-7, L-Xing No. 58/C at Km 95/23-25 & L-xing
No. 73/C at Km 127/19-21 on Delhi Ambala section of Delhi Division and
Construction of one Limited Height Sub way (LHS) in lieu of L-xing No. 9
at Km 12/1- 2 near Maman Halt station & Balance work of road approaches
of LHS in lieu of L-xing No. 14 at Km 24/1-2 near Bulandshahar RailwayThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
Station on Khurja-Meerut section of Moradabad Division of Northern
Railway. It is stated that disputes arose between the parties regarding
completion of the project. It is stated that Clause 64 of the General
Conditions of Contract (GCC) contains an Arbitration Clause which
provides that disputes arising between the parties under the Agreement shall
be decided by means of Arbitration and the seat of Arbitration shall be
Delhi. It is stated that Notice under Section 21 of the Arbitration Act was
issued by the Petitioner on 12.08.2025. It is stated that the Respondent has
failed to reply to the said Notice. The Petitioner has, thereafter, approached
this Court by filing the present Petition.
3. Issue Notice.
4. Learned Counsel for the Respondent accepts notice. He states that no
disputes have arisen between the parties. He draws the attention of this
Court to Clause 64.1(v) of the GCC which reads as under:
“64.(1)(v): If the Contractor(s) does/do not prefer
his/their specific and final claims in writing, within a
period of 90 days of receiving the intimation from the
Railways that the final bill is ready for payment,
he/they will be deemed to have waived his/their
claim(s) and the Railway shall be discharged and
released of all liabilities under the contract in respect
of these claims.”
5. Learned Counsel for the Respondent, therefore, states that in view of
the abovementioned clause, the Petitioner cannot raise the disputes.
6. The said contention of the learned Counsel for the Respondent cannot
be accepted in view of the settled law that the referral Court under Section
11 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996, has to only examine the
prima facie existence of an arbitration agreement and the determination ofThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
the substantive rights, maintainability of claims, and the issue of limitation
etc., should be left to the Arbitral Tribunal. The Apex Court in Interplay
Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration, 1996 & Stamp Act,
1899, In re, (2024) 6 SCC 1, has observed as under:-
“165. The legislature confined the scope of reference
under Section 11(6-A) to the examination of the
existence of an arbitration agreement. The use of the
term “examination” in itself connotes that the scope of
the power is limited to a prima facie determination.
Since the Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the
requirement of “existence” of an arbitration
agreement draws effect from Section 7 of the
Arbitration Act. In Duro Felguera [Duro Felguera,
S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729 :
(2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] , this Court held that the
Referral Courts only need to consider one aspect to
determine the existence of an arbitration agreement —
whether the underlying contract contains an
arbitration agreement which provides for arbitration
pertaining to the disputes which have arisen between
the parties to the agreement. Therefore, the scope of
examination under Section 11(6-A) should be
confined to the existence of an arbitration agreement
on the basis of Section 7. Similarly, the validity of an
arbitration agreement, in view of Section 7, should be
restricted to the requirement of formal validity such
as the requirement that the agreement be in writing.
This interpretation also gives true effect to the
doctrine of competence-competence by leaving the
issue of substantive existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement to be decided by Arbitral
Tribunal under Section 16. We accordingly clarify
the position of law laid down in Vidya Drolia [Vidya
Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., (2021) 2 SCC 1 :
(2021) 1 SCC (Civ) 549] in the context of Section 8
and Section 11 of the Arbitration Act.This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
166. The burden of proving the existence of arbitration
agreement generally lies on the party seeking to rely
on such agreement. In jurisdictions such as India,
which accept the doctrine of competence-competence,
only prima facie proof of the existence of an
arbitration agreement must be adduced before the
Referral Court. The Referral Court is not the
appropriate forum to conduct a mini-trial by allowing
the parties to adduce the evidence in regard to the
existence or validity of an arbitration agreement. The
determination of the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement on the basis of evidence ought
to be left to the Arbitral Tribunal. This position of law
can also be gauged from the plain language of the
statute.
167. Section 11(6-A) uses the expression “examination
of the existence of an arbitration agreement”. The
purport of using the word “examination” connotes
that the legislature intends that the Referral Court
has to inspect or scrutinise the dealings between the
parties for the existence of an arbitration agreement.
Moreover, the expression “examination” does not
connote or imply a laborious or contested inquiry. [
P. Ramanatha Aiyar, The Law Lexicon (2nd Edn.,
1997) 666.] On the other hand, Section 16 provides
that the Arbitral Tribunal can “rule” on its
jurisdiction, including the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement. A “ruling” connotes
adjudication of disputes after admitting evidence from
the parties. Therefore, it is evident that the Referral
Court is only required to examine the existence of
arbitration agreements, whereas the Arbitral Tribunal
ought to rule on its jurisdiction, including the issues
pertaining to the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement. A similar view was adopted byThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
this Court in Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh
Optifibre Ltd. [Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh
Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 234]”
(emphasis supplied)
7. Similarly, the Apex Court in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish
Spinning, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1754, has observed as under:-
“122. Once an arbitration agreement exists between
parties, then the option of approaching the civil court
becomes unavailable to them. In such a scenario, if the
parties seek to raise a dispute, they necessarily have to
do so before the arbitral tribunal. The arbitral
tribunal, in turn, can only be constituted as per the
procedure agreed upon between the parties. However,
if there is a failure of the agreed upon procedure, then
the duty of appointing the arbitral tribunal falls upon
the referral court under Section 11 of the Act, 1996. If
the referral court, at this stage, goes beyond the scope
of enquiry as provided under the section and examines
the issue of “accord and satisfaction”, then it would
amount to usurpation of the power which the parties
had intended to be exercisable by the arbitral tribunal
alone and not by the national courts. Such a scenario
would impeach arbitral autonomy and would not fit
well with the scheme of the Act, 1996.
*****
125. We are also of the view that ex-facie frivolity and
dishonesty in litigation is an aspect which the arbitral
tribunal is equally, if not more, capable to decide upon
the appreciation of the evidence adduced by the
parties. We say so because the arbitral tribunal has the
benefit of going through all the relevant evidence and
pleadings in much more detail than the referral court.
If the referral court is able to see the frivolity in the
litigation on the basis of bare minimum pleadings, thenThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
it would be incorrect to doubt that the arbitral tribunal
would not be able to arrive at the same inference, most
likely in the first few hearings itself, with the benefit of
extensive pleadings and evidentiary material.”
8. Since it is well-settled that referral courts should normally follow the
policy of ‘when in doubt, refer’ and in view of the fact that disputes have
certainly arisen between the parties, this Court is inclined to appoint an
Arbitrator to adjudicate upon the disputes between the parties.
9. Accordingly, Justice Indira Banerjee, Former Judge of the Supreme
Court (Mob. No: 9560808777) is appointed as the Sole Arbitrator to
adjudicate upon the disputes between the parties.
10. The arbitration would take place under the aegis of the Delhi
International Arbitration Centre (DIAC) and would abide by its rules and
regulations. The learned Arbitrator shall be entitled to fees as per the
Schedule of Fees maintained by the DIAC.
11. The learned Arbitrator is also requested to file the requisite disclosure
under Section 12(2) of the 1996 Act within two weeks of entering on
reference.
12. All rights and contentions of the parties in relation to the
claims/counter-claims are kept open, to be decided by the learned Arbitrator
on their merits, in accordance with law.
13. It is made clear that nothing in this order shall be construed as an
expression of this Court on the merits of the contentions of the parties.
14. It is further made clear that the observations made in this Order are
squarely limited to the appointment of an Arbitrator. Needless to say, it is
open for the Respondent to urge its contention regarding arbitrability etc.This is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
before the Arbitrator.
15. The petition stands disposed of in the above terms, along with
pending application(s), if any.
SUBRAMONIUM PRASAD, J
DECEMBER 22, 2025
RahulThis is a digitally signed order.
The authenticity of the order can be re-verified from Delhi High Court Order Portal by scanning the QR code shown above.
The Order is downloaded from the DHC Server on 26/12/2025 at 11:35:16