COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: O.M.P. (T) (COMM.) 122/2022
DATE: 07.01.2026 
PLAINTIFF: INTERCODE SOLUTIONS PRIVATE LIMITED 
DEFENDANT: ARMOR INDIA CODING AND IMAGING SUPPLIES PRIVATE LIMITED
JUDGE: Justice PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR KAURAV

----JUDGMENT-----

“Everything is theoretically impossible, until it is done”, is a
remarkable statement by Robert A. Heinlein, an author of American science
fiction. It holds some relevance in the present case, as it involves an order of
termination of the arbitral proceedings on the ground that the continuation of
the proceedings has become „impossible‟.
2. The present petition is filed under Sections 14 and 15 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the „Act‟)
assailing the order dated 02.09.2022 passed by the Arbitral Tribunal,
whereby, the Tribunal terminated the arbitral proceedings invoking Section
32(2)(c) of the Act. The impugned order has been challenged on various
grounds, inter alia, that the statutory requirements of Section 32(2)(c) of the
Act are not satisfied.
FACTUAL MATRIX
3. The dispute arises from a series of commercial arrangements between
the parties culminating in a Business Transfer Agreement (hereinafter
referred to as „BTA‟) executed on 03.05.2019, under which the respondent
agreed to acquire the petitioner‟s thermal transfer ribbon business for a total
consideration of INR 35 crores. The transaction was preceded by a Secrecy
3
Agreement dated 21.11.2017 and a Letter of Intent issued on 11.12.2018 by
Armor SAS, the parent company of the respondent.
4. Following the execution of the BTA and a mutually agreed extension
of the closing date, the respondent, on 30.08.2019, paid INR 29.5 crores and
took over the entire business undertaking, including all assets, records, and
employees, in terms of Schedule H of the BTA. The petitioners assert that
they fulfilled all pre-closing obligations as certified by the Closing
Certificate under Schedule G of the BTA. Despite assuming full operational
control of the business from the closing date, the respondent allegedly
withheld the balance INR 5.5 crores.
5. Conversely, after the takeover, as per the facts stated by the
respondent, PwC was engaged by the respondent to conduct a forensic audit
of the transaction between the parties. Through correspondence exchanged
between October and December 2019, PwC levelled allegations of fraud,
misrepresentation, and breach of the BTA against the petitioner.
6. In the meantime, the petitioners sought interim protection by filing a
petition under Section 9 of the Act, resulting in directions for disclosure of
assets. On 09.03.2020, the petitioners formally invoked arbitration under
Clause 9.6 of the BTA by filing an application to DIAC, but the respondent
did not respond, prompting the petitioners to move a petition under Section
11(6) of the Act.
7. During the pendency of the Section 11 petition, the respondent, in its
response to the petitioner's request for arbitration dated 09.03.2020 before
DIAC, nominated its nominee arbitrator on 19.01.2021. Thereafter, a threemember Tribunal was constituted under the DIAC Rules, 2018.
4
8. Once the arbitral proceedings commenced, the respondent sought the
joinder of several non-signatory parties under Rule 28.1 of the DIAC Rules,
which the Tribunal rejected on 29.04.2021 while clarifying that the
respondent was free to pursue remedies before a competent forum. The
petitioners filed their Statement of Claim on 09.06.2021.
9. Shortly thereafter, and before filing its defence in arbitration, the
respondent instituted CS(COMM) 376/2021 on 13.08.2021 before this Court
against the petitioners and multiple non-signatories on the same underlying
cause of action forming the basis of its proposed counterclaims. The
following day, the respondent filed its Statement of Defence and
Counterclaims before the Tribunal, allegedly without disclosing the
pendency of the newly instituted civil suit.
10. Subsequent thereto, the petitioners challenged the maintainability of
the counterclaims through an application under Section 16 of the Act, which
the Tribunal dismissed on 12.02.2022. The parties then filed crossapplications under Section 32 of the Act. The petitioners sought termination
confined to the counterclaims, while the respondent sought termination of
the entire arbitral proceedings on the ground that the petitioners, by
participating in the civil suit proceedings without invoking Section 8 of the
Act, had elected the civil forum, thereby rendering continuation of
arbitration impossible. After considering the rival submissions, the Tribunal,
vide order dated 02.09.2022, allowed the respondent‟s application under
Section 32(2)(c) of the Act and terminated the proceedings in their entirety,
primarily citing multiplicity arising from the civil suit.
5
11. The petitioners, assailing the aforesaid order, filed the present petition
seeking setting aside of the impugned order and restoration of the arbitral
proceedings for adjudication of their claims under the BTA.
SUBMISSIONS
12. Mr. Rajshekhar Rao, learned counsel for the petitioners, has made the
following submissions: -
i) The present petition under Section 14 of the Act is maintainable in
light of precedents, inter alia, Lalitkumar V. Sanghavi (Dead)
through LRs. v. Dharamdas V. Sanghavi & Ors.
1
P, and CL
Suncon v. National Highways Authority of India2
, which
recognize that termination of mandate under Section 32(2)(c) of
the Act may be examined under Section 14 of the Act.
ii) The impugned order is contrary to the principle of party autonomy
and the statutory framework of the Act, as the Tribunal, despite
acknowledging a valid arbitration agreement, directed the
petitioners to seek a remedy before a Civil Court, contrary to dicta
of the Supreme Court in Bharat Aluminium Co. v. Kaiser
Aluminium Technical Services Inc.
3
, Centrotrade Minerals &
Metal Inc. v. Hindustan Copper Ltd.,4
and ONGC Ltd. v. Afcons
Gunanusa JV5

1
(2014) 7 SCC 255
2
2021 SCC OnLine Del 313
3
(2016) 4 SCC 126
4
(2017) 2 SCC 228,
5
2022 SCC OnLine SC 1122
6
iii)The Arbitral Tribunal failed to appreciate that claims and
counterclaims are distinct proceedings and erred in holding that an
application under Section 8 of the Act before the Civil Court was
necessary, despite arbitration already having been invoked.
iv) The conduct of the respondent constitutes forum shopping and
abuse of process. Such conduct is impermissible in view of the
decision in Avitel Post Studioz Ltd. v. HSBC PI Holdings
(Mauritius) Ltd.6
, and A. Ayyasamy v. A. Paramasivam.
7
v) The Tribunal erred in invoking the absence of non-signatory
parties as a ground for termination, particularly when the joinder
request had already been rejected by Procedural Order dated
29.04.2021 under Rule 28.1 of the DIAC Rules, which had
attained finality.
13. Per contra, Mr. Ashim Sood, learned counsel for the respondent,
supporting the impugned order, made the following submissions: -
i) The petitioners, by their consistent conduct, have waived their
right to invoke arbitration. It is a trite law that where a party
initiates or participates in civil proceedings without insisting on
arbitration, the arbitration agreement becomes inoperative as a
result of election.
ii) A party cannot selectively rely upon the arbitration clause for
certain claims while simultaneously pursuing civil remedies for

6
(2021) 4 SCC 713
7
(2016) 10 SCC 386
7
others. The principles of election and approbation reprobation
preclude a party from taking inconsistent stands and prevent a
party from approbating the contract for benefit while repudiating it
when convenient.
iii)A party seeking to enforce an arbitration clause must demonstrate
an unequivocal intention to be bound by arbitration. Any
participation in a civil suit without such assertion amounts to
abandonment of the right to arbitrate. The petitioner, knowingly,
did not file any application under Section 8 of the Act before the
Civil Court, and this fact has been duly recorded and relied upon
by the Tribunal.
iv) Once parties have engaged in parallel litigation or invoked
multiple Court proceedings, the arbitration clause stands rendered
inoperative, and compelling arbitration thereafter defeats the
legislative purpose of efficiency and finality.
v) The respondent relied upon equitable doctrines, including waiver,
estoppel, election, and the principle that no party may "blow hot
and cold" or "sail in two boats at the same time." Reference was
made to the decision of the Supreme Court in Food Corporation
of India v. Yadav Engineer & Contractor,8
to submit that once a
party elects a forum and derives advantage from it, it cannot
subsequently rely upon the arbitration clause.

8
(1982) 2 SCC 499
8
vi) The termination of arbitral proceedings under Section 32(2)(c) of
the Act was justified as the petitioners, themselves, rendered
continuation of the proceedings impossible by their contradictory
conduct. A party guilty of such conduct cannot seek revival of the
arbitral mandate under Section 14 of the Act.
vii) Reliance is placed on the decisions of the Supreme Court in
Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd. v. Jayesh H. Pandya and Thomas
Cook (India) Ltd. v. Beach Ark Hotels (P) Ltd, to assert that
neither bifurcation of causes of action nor splitting of parties is
permissible under the scheme of the Act. Reliance is further placed
on Shri Chand Construction v. Tata Capital3
, Tata Capital v.
Shri Chand Construction4
, Onyx Musicabsolute v. Yash Raj
Films5
, Rachappa Gurudappa Bijapur v. Gurudiddappa6
, Food
Corporation of India v. Yadav Engineer & Contractor7
,
Ramasamy Athappan v. ICC8
and Union of India v. N.
Murugesan9
.
14. I have heard learned counsel appearing for the parties and have
perused the record.
15. At this stage, it is apposite to note that after hearing the parties at
length, judgment in the matter was reserved on 13.11.2025. However, in the
interregnum, the Supreme Court authoritatively settled the legal position
concerning the remedy available against an order of termination under
Section 32 of the Act, holding in Harshbir Singh Pannu and Anr. v.
9
Jaswinder Singh 9
that the appropriate remedy is to approach a tribunal in a
review and then the Courts under Section 14 of the Act. In view of the said
pronouncement, the parties were re-notified and afforded an opportunity to
address further submissions on the issue, including as to whether the
petitioners intended to seek recourse by way of review. However, Mr. Rao,
placing reliance on the principles articulated by the Supreme Court in
paragraph no. 415 of the aforenoted decision, contended that the Arbitral
Tribunal has brought the proceedings to an end by adjudicating the matter
on merits, and consequently, the impugned action cannot be characterised as
falling within the limited ambit of a procedural correction or review. This
position was fairly conceded by Mr. Sood. In view thereof, the matter was
again reserved for consideration.
ANALYSIS
16. At the threshold, it is pertinent to note the scope and ambit of the
jurisdiction of the Court under Section 14 of the Act. Section 14(1)(a) of the
Act envisages termination of the mandate of the Arbitrator when the
Arbitrator either becomes de jure or de facto incapable of functioning as an
Arbitrator.
17. In the context of termination of proceedings, the Supreme Court in
Harshbir Singh Pannu has now clarified that Section 14(2) of the Act, and
in particular the expression used therein “the Court to decide on the
termination of the mandate,” must receive a purposive and expansive
construction so as to encompass a challenge to an order simpliciter
terminating arbitral proceedings. The Supreme Court reasoned that
termination of arbitral proceedings, in substance and effect, results in the

9
2025 INSC 1400
10
arbitrator being discharged of the obligation to conduct and administer the
arbitration. In view of this consequence, and until the legislative lacuna in
the Act is addressed, the Court has held that a party aggrieved by an order
terminating arbitral proceedings must be afforded a remedy by permitting a
challenge to such an order before the Court under Section 14(2) of the Act.
18. Herein, the fundamental controversy pertains to the invocation of the
provision under Section 32(2)(c) of the Act. The petitioners assert that the
preconditions of Section 32(2)(c) of the Act were not satisfied and that the
Tribunal‟s decision amounted to a misapplication of law resulting in
frustration of party autonomy and arbitral process, whereas, the respondent
avers that the petitioners‟ conduct in pursuing parallel proceedings and
failing to seek recourse under Section 8 of the Act resulted in waiver,
abandonment, and rendering the arbitration agreement inoperative.
19. Accordingly, the primary question that arises for consideration is
whether the continuation of arbitration was rendered „impossible‟ or
„unnecessary‟ in view of the provisions of Section 32(2)(c) of the Act. The
consequential issue is whether the termination of the arbitral proceeding was
justified and sustainable in the eyes of law?
20. In limine, it is noted that the statutory text and scheme envisaged in
Section 32(2) of the Act, confers upon an arbitral tribunal a narrow, residual
power to terminate proceedings only in instances where (a) a claimant
withdraws his claim, (b) the parties agree to termination, or (c) the tribunal
finds that continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason become
„unnecessary‟ or „impossible‟.
11
21. The Supreme Court in Srei Infrastructure Finance Ltd. v. Tuff
Drilling (P) Ltd.,
10 expounded that Section 32(2)(c) of the Act contemplates
termination of arbitral proceedings only in narrowly circumscribed
contingencies expressly enumerated in said provision, and that the grounds
under Section 32(2)(c) of the Act operate in a domain wholly distinct from
the scheme of Section 25(a) of the Act, which governs termination for
default of the claimant. The Court, in the factual matrix therein, held that the
expressions „unnecessary‟ or „impossible‟ cannot be conflated with or
expanded to include situations of non-prosecution or absence of the
claimant, as such defaults fall squarely within Section 25(a) of the Act.
Accordingly, the Court also held that the scope of Section 32(2)(c) of the
Act is confined to circumstances where the arbitral process cannot proceed
for reasons extraneous to party default, and cannot be invoked as a substitute
for the relevant procedure prescribed under the Act.
22. In an almost similar factual matrix as Srei Infrastructure Finance
Ltd., the Supreme Court in Dani Wooltex Corpn. v. Sheil Properties (P)
Ltd.,11 held that Section 32(2)(c) of the Act sets out an exhaustive
framework governing the termination of arbitral proceedings, which may
occur only upon the rendering of a final award or in the limited
circumstances expressly enumerated in Section 32(2)(c) of the Act.
Specifically, the Court emphasised that the grounds under Section 32(2)(a)
and (b) are confined to withdrawal by the claimant and consensual
termination by the parties, whereas, clause (c) operates as a residuary

10 (2018) 11 SCC 470
11 (2024) 7 SCC 1
12
provision applicable only when the continuation of the proceedings has, for
reasons independent of party default, become „unnecessary‟ or „impossible.‟
23. More importantly, the Bombay High Court in Maharashtra State
Electricity Board v. Datar Switchgear12
, recognised that clause (c) to subsection 2 of Section 32 of the Act vests a residuary but exceptional power in
an arbitral tribunal to terminate the mandate, where continuation is rendered
infructuous or impossible.
24. Pertinently, it was also observed that a party that has engaged in
contumacious conduct cannot be permitted to derive advantage from such
conduct so as to seek termination of arbitral proceedings. The Court further
noted that it is neither feasible nor advisable to exhaustively enumerate the
circumstances in which an arbitral tribunal may conclude that continuation
of the proceedings has become unnecessary or impossible. Such
determinations, the Court noted, must depend on the facts and equities of
each case, guided by the overarching principle that a party cannot profit
from its own wrongful acts. The relevant extract of the aforenoted decision
reads as under: -
46. Section 32 is entitled “Termination of proceedings” and subsection (1) provides that the arbitral proceedings shall be terminated
by the final Arbitral Award or by an order of the Arbitral Tribunal
under sub-section (2). Sub-section (2) of section 32 is important for the
purposes of the present proceedings and provides as follows:
“32(2) The Arbitral Tribunal shall issue an order for the termination of
the arbitral proceedings where-
(a) the claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects to
the order and the Arbitral Tribunal recognises a legitimate interest on
his part in obtaining a final settlement of the dispute,

12 2002 SCC OnLine Bom 983
13
(b) the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or.
(c) the Arbitral Tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings
has for any other reason become unnecessary or impossible.”
(emphasis supplied).
47. Sub-section (2), therefore, contemplates three situations where the
Arbitral Tribunal is vested with the power to terminate the arbitral
proceedings, namely, (i) when the claimant withdraws his claim, (ii)
when the parties agree and (iii) when the Tribunal finds that
continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason become
unnecessary or impossible. The mandate of the Arbitral Tribunal
terminates with the termination of the arbitral proceedings. (Subsection (3) of section 32). Clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 32 has
vested a residuary power in the Arbitral Tribunal to terminate the
proceedings where it finds that a continuation thereof has for any other
reason become unnecessary or impossible. The legislature has
advisedly left it to the Tribunal to determine as to when the
continuation of the proceedings has become unnecessary or impossible.
The expression “unnecessary” may for instance involve a situation
where proceedings are rendered infructuous. A situation may have
arisen as a result of which an adjudication into the dispute has become
unnecessary either as a result of the fact that the dispute does not
survive or for any other valid reason. Situations may also arise where a
continuation of proceedings is rendered impossible. Impossibility is not
merely to be viewed from the point of view of a physical impossibility of
an adjudication, but may conceivably encompass a situation where a
party by a consistent course of conduct renders the very continuation of
the arbitral proceedings impossible. Then again a party which has been
guilty of contumacious conduct cannot be heard to seek the benefit of
its conduct to seek termination. It is impossible to catalogue the
circumstances in which the Arbitral Tribunal may hold that it is either
unnecessary or impossible to continue the arbitral proceedings.”
25. Thus, by deploying the words in Section 32(2)(c) of the Act, the
legislature has created a narrowly circumscribed gateway for premature
termination of arbitral proceedings.
26. Elaborating more on the legal position explicated in Datar
Switchgear Ltd, it is apposite to observe that the terms „unnecessary‟ and
„impossible‟ are elastic and they must, in the context that they are used,
resist rigid, one-size-fits-all definitions. Depending on the factual matrix and
14
equities of each case, „unnecessary‟ may encompass instances where the
arbitral process no longer serves any meaningful adjudicatory purpose; but
what is „unnecessary‟ in one dispute may not be so in another. The tribunal
must therefore assess, in light of the circumstances before it, whether further
proceedings would be otiose.
27. Similarly, „impossible‟ should not be confined to a narrow conception
of physical inability alone. It may include circumstances that strike at the
tribunal‟s ability to adjudicate. How and when such circumstances amount
to „impossibility‟ will depend on the particular facts and on reasoned
findings by the tribunal.
28. Moreover, in order to protect the sanctity of the arbitral proceedings,
the power to terminate under Section 32(2)(c) of the Act may ordinarily be
treated as a measure of last resort. Before taking this step, a tribunal may
consider whether reasonably proportionate and practicable alternatives exist.
For example, staying proceedings, proceeding on narrowed issues in stages,
or impleading a necessary party and whether those alternatives can preserve
the tribunal‟s ability to render effective relief.
29. Also, where a party‟s own contumacious or obstructive conduct has
materially contributed to the impediment alleged, the tribunal must take that
conduct into account and be cautious about permitting that party to obtain
advantage from such conduct.
13 Whether such conduct disentitles a party
from seeking termination is a matter to be determined on the facts and the
equities of the case.
30. In short, an order of termination may be appropriate where the record,
taken as a whole, supports a reasoned conclusion that continuation has
15
become either „unnecessary‟ or „impossible‟. But the precise contours of
these conclusions will vary with the facts.
31. It is, therefore, neither feasible nor desirable to attempt an exhaustive
catalogue of circumstances in which Section 32(2)(c) of the Act will apply.
Each application of the provision is fact-driven and must be guided by the
tribunal‟s careful appraisal of the surrounding circumstances, the interests of
justice, and the principle that a party should not profit from its own wrongful
acts.
32. The statutory architecture of the Act, as consistently reiterated by the
Supreme Court, reflects the legislature‟s unwavering commitment to party
autonomy and the principle of minimal judicial intervention. These
foundational pillars are embedded throughout the Act‟s language and
structure. Any interpretation of Section 32(2)(c) of the Act should also
undoubtedly exemplify this commitment and, therefore, restricts the scope
of termination of proceedings in an agreed forum.
33. Turning to the facts of the instant case, it becomes apparent that the
reasons referred to by the Tribunal, particularly those articulated in
paragraph No. 32 of the impugned order and germane to the issues at hand,
may be categorised as follows:
(i) In view of the pending suit, there exists a clear likelihood of
conflicting decisions and a resultant multiplicity of proceedings.
(ii) Such multiplicity of proceedings, coupled with the potential for
inconsistent outcomes, runs contrary to the principles of public policy.
(iii) The continuation of the arbitral proceedings in respect of the

13 Reference to Datar switchgear ltd
16
claims under reference, despite the pendency of the suit, does not
offer an efficacious or workable remedy.
(iv) It is, therefore, legally impossible to allow the arbitration to
continue in these circumstances
34. For the sake of clarity, paragraph no.32 of the award is extracted as
under: -
32. As discussed hereinabove, the continuation of the present arbitration
proceeding, in the face of the suit, has resulted in multiplicity of proceedings
with the likelihood of conflicting decisions in contravention of the rule of
public policy. The termination of the proceedings qua the claims in the
reference, in the face of the suit, does not remedy the situation. lt is
therefore, legally impermissible to continue arbitration proceedings in the
singular facts and circumstances. In other words, continuation of the instant
arbitration proceeding has become impossible, warranting the invocation of
Section 32(2)(c) of the Act. The present arbitration proceeding is therefore
terminated as a whole under Section 32(2)(c) of the Act. The application
under Section 32(2}(c) filed by the Petitioner is rejected and that filed by the
Respondent is allowed”
35. Insofar as the discussion contained in paragraphs no. 31 and 33 of the
impugned order is concerned, it pertains to distinct aspects arising under
Sections 32, 25A, and 38(2) of Act.
36. A perusal of the reasons underlying the termination of the mandate
indicates that while the Tribunal‟s exposition of the legal position in the
preceding paragraphs is, in principle, unimpeachable, its application of the
law to the facts of the present case is wholly impermissible. At its
foundation, the principal basis for the invocation of the power of termination
is, as per the Tribunal, the impossibility of the arbitral proceeding in view of
the legal bar attracted due to the pendency of the civil suit.
37. At this stage, it is pertinent to compare the prayers made in the
statement of claim and the suit filed in the Court, so as to examine the aspect
17
of multiplicity of proceedings, which forms the basis of the conclusion
reached by the Tribunal. The comparison is depicted in the table below: -
RELIEF SOUGHT IN MATTER OF
ARBITRATION DAC/2764D/03-2020
RELIEF SOUGHT IN CS(COMM) NO.
376/2021
 Pass an award in favour of the
Claimant No. 1 directing the
Respondent to pay a sum of Rs.
6,81,04,278/- (Rupees Six Crores
Eighty-One Lakhs Four Thousand
Two Hundred Seventy-Eight Only)
towards the balance consideration
under the Business Transfer
Agreement dated 03.05.2019;
 Pass an award in favour of the
Claimant No.1 directing the
Respondent to pay a sum of Rs. Rs.
2,04,11,887/- (Rupees Two Crore
Four Lakh Eleven Thousand Eight
Hundred Eighty-Seven only)
towards the amounts paid to the
foreign creditors appearing in
Schedule E of the Business Transfer
Agreement dated 03.05.2019 on
behalf of the Respondent; 253
 Pass an award in favour of the
Claimant No.1 directing the
Respondent to pay a sum of Rs.
1,04,35,468/- (Rupees One Crore
Four Lakhs Thirty-Five Thousand
Four Hundred Sixty-Eight only)
towards the amounts to be paid to
the foreign creditors appearing in
Schedule E of the Business Transfer
Agreement dated 03.05.2019 on
behalf of the Respondent;
 In the alternative to Prayer (c)
above, pass an award in favour of
the Claimant No.1 directing the
Respondent to pay a sum of Rs.
 Order and decree the Defendants
to, jointly and severally, pay to the
Plaintiffs an amount of INR
19,02,91 ,000 (Rupees Nineteen
Crores Two Lakh Ninety-One
Thousand) or such other amounts
as may be deemed appropriate by
this Hon'ble Court, together with
interest, as compensation for
damages and losses suffered by the
Plaintiffs;
 Direct Defendant No. 6 to refund
the amount of INR 2, 77,57,825
(Rupees Two Crore Seventy-Seven
Lakh Fifty-Seven Thousand Eight
Hundred and Twenty-Five)
received by it from various
customers of the Undertaking as on
July 20, 2021, and such further or
other amounts as may be collected
by it thereafter;
 Direct the Defendants to deliver to
Plaintiff No. 1 any and all
confidential and other commercial
information relating to the
Undertaking that is in their
possession, including those parts of
the parts of the Undertaking not
transferred by Defendant No. 6 to
Plaintiff No. 1;
 Award costs of the proceedings in
favour of the Plaintiffs; and
Pass any further or other order(s)/
directions as this Hon'ble Court may deem
18
1,04,35,468/- (Rupees One Crore
Four Lakhs Thirty-Five Thousand
Four Hundred Sixty-Eight only)
directly to the foreign creditors;
 Pass an award in favour of the
Claimant No.1 directing the
Respondent to pay to a sum of USD
30,000 towards cancellation of
Purchase Order no. DLS
2018050402 dated 04 May 2018 in
terms of Clause 3.1.2 of the BTA in
the designated bank account of the
Claimant No.1 i.e.
Bank Name Kotak Mahindra Bank
Account CC
Type
Address Mira Bhayander Branch
Account 3911186009
Number
IFSC Code KKBK0000649
 Pass an award in favour of the
Claimant No.1 directing the
Respondent to pay pendente lite
and future interest @ 18% p.a. on
the amounts claimed under Claims
No. 1-5 above, till the date of actual
realization;
 Pass an award in favour of the
Claimant No.1 directing the
Respondent to pay the cost of the
present arbitration proceedings;
and
Pass an award in favour of the Claimants
and against the Respondent for such other
or further reliefs or amount(s) as this
Hon'ble Tribunal may deem fit and proper
in the facts and circumstances of this case.
fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case
19
38. The above comparison would indicate that there may indeed be
certain overlapping issues between the arbitration proceedings and the civil
suit. However, the Court is of the opinion that the mere existence of such
overlap cannot, by itself, justify the Tribunal terminating the proceedings
midway under Section 32(2)(c) of the Act, on the apprehension that
conflicting decisions may arise.
39. At this stage, it is pertinent to extract the discussion of the Tribunal
while terminating the proceedings. The said extract is reproduced
hereinunder: -
18. As the pleadings in the reference and the suit demonstrate, the
Claimants‟ defence in the suit is their claims in the reference and the
Respondent‟s claims in the suit are premised on its defence to the
Claimants‟ claims in the present proceedings. To reiterate, the
Tribunal and the Hon‟ble High Court would have to examine the same
facts and issues. However, the adjudication in the suit would be more
comprehensive, having regard to the involvement of additional parties
and the cause of action pertaining to them. As indicated hereinabove,
the Claimants in their written statement have adequately elaborated the
facts on which their claims in the reference are founded and have also
set out their claims in details. The necessary foundational facts to
pursue their claims in the suit have thus been furnished in their written
statement. As such, the Claimants would not be rendered remediless, if
the present proceedings are terminated as a whole, and they would be
in a position to raise counterclaims in the suitor file a cross suit.
Indeed, it has not been argued on behalf of the Claimants that their
remedies in the suit are barred by limitation, their only cavil being of
delay in adjudication and denial of their right to pursue the present
proceedings in terms of the BTA.
19. The scope and purport of Section 8 of the Act prior to its
amendment vide Arbitration and Conciliation (Amdt.) Act 2015 came to
be examined by the Hon‟ble Apex Court in Sukanya Holdings (P) Ltd.
(Supra). The appellant therein had filed an application under Section 8
of the Act in a suit filed by the Respondent No.1, to refer the parties to
arbitration. The application was resisted by the Respondent No.1
contending that the subject matter of the suit was not between the
contracting parties and the reliefs claimed were not only against the
20
contracting parties but also against other parties/defendants. The
jurisdictional High Court before which the application had been filed,
rejected the same. The Hon‟ble Apex Court observed that there was no
provision that when the subject matter of the suit includes subject
matter of the arbitration agreement as well as other disputes, the
matter is required to be referred to arbitration. Further, there was no
provision as well for splitting the cause of action or parties and
referring the subject matter of the suit to arbitration. Having regard to
the text of Section 8 as it stood then, it was held that the matter in the
suit ought to be one which comes within the ambit of the arbitration
agreement and which the parties have agreed to refer to arbitration. It
was ruled consequently that, where a suit is as to a matter which lies
outside the arbitration agreement and is also1064between some of the
parties who are not parties to the arbitration agreement, Section 8
would have no application. With reference to the poser whether a
dispute can be partly referred to arbitration, their Lordships held the
view that no interpretation of Section 8 is possible, permitting
bifurcation of the subject matter or the cause of action or the parties.
20. In Emaar MGF Land Limited (Supra), the Hon‟ble Apex Court in
the context of the amended language of Section 8, consequent upon the
2015amendment of the Act, held that the same limits the intervention by
the judicial authority to the scrutiny of only one aspect i.e the prima
facie existence of a valid arbitration agreement. It was held that the
words „notwithstanding any judgement, decree or order of the Supreme
Court or any court‟ added by the amendment were to give effect to the
legislative intendment of minimizing the intervention of the judicial
authority in the context of an arbitration agreement, registering a
departure from the determinations made inter-alia in Sukanya
Holdings(P) Ltd. (Supra).
21. Having regard to the imputations made in the suit and reiterated by
the Respondent in its statement of defence in the reference, about the
involvement of the Claimants and the other Defendants in the alleged
conspiracy and their liability for the fraud and the deceit said to have
been perpetrated by them, the Tribunal would be rendered unable to
adjudicate1065thereon in absence of the additional parties. The
adjudication in the reference in this context, would result in bifurcation
of the parties and the cause of action, which does not meet judicial
approval. On the other hand, these imputations having been pleaded,
are required to be adjudicated comprehensively in presence of all the
Defendants, in the suit.
22. To restate, adjudication of the claims in the reference, would
involve examination of the statement of defence and likewise,
adjudication of the claims in the suit would warrant assessment of the
defence of the Claimants, resulting in mutual evaluation of common
facts, leading to multiplicity of the proceedings with the possibility of
21
conflicting decisions. The cause of action for the suit though different
from that of the claims in the reference to begin with, would essentially
get interknit at the time of adjudication, as common facts and issues
would be involved. There would be bifurcation of parties and cause of
action in course of adjudication in the reference in absence of the
additional parties and to that extent, the adjudication in the reference
would be incomplete, being limited to the parties and the cause of
action before the Tribunal. In this extraordinary fact situation, the
arbitration agreement has to yield to the consideration of public policy,
as the continuation of the reference in the attendant facts and
circumstances would result in multiplicity of the proceedings and
likelihood of conflicting decisions.
23. In Aloys Wobben (Supra), Prem Kalia and Daryanani (Supra),
Mangilal Rungta (Supra), Kirtika Mukesh Bura (Supra), Vishnu B.
Mayekar (Supra)and Debashis Singha Roy (Supra), it has been
consistently underlined that the rule of public policy and justice
warrants avoidance of multiplicity of judicial proceedings requiring the
Court to decide again in respect of the same subject matter resulting in
conflicting decisions on the same point.
24. The Hon‟ble Apex Court in Vidya Drolia (Supra), propounded that
an arbitrator, like the Court is bound to resolve and decide disputes in
accordance with the public policy of the law. This decision is to drive
home the point, that this Tribunal ought to avoid multiplicity of
proceedings, which is opposed to the rule of public policy.
25. In re the contention of the Claimants, that as in terms of Clause 9.3
of the BTA, the Claimants are liable to indemnify the Respondent, for
the losses suffered by it due to their (Claimants) fraud, willful
misconduct and gross negligence, the Respondent ought to have acted
as per the BTA, if it had any grievance in that regard instead of
instituting the suit, suffice it to state that Clause 9.3.2 of the BTA limits
such claims resulting directly from the fraud, willful misconduct or
gross negligence by the Claimant No.1 and not by the additional
parties in the suit as alleged. The indemnity clause of the BTA thus does
not include third parties who are not parties to the BTA but are
allegedly active participants to the fraud and deceit. The1067claims in
the suit against the additional parties, imputing fraud and deceit by
them therefore, do not come within the purview of the BTA. The suit, in
this factual premise, cannot be faulted to have been instituted in breach
of the BTA. The plea of the Claimants to the contrary, is rejected.
26. The fact that the Respondent had along with another, instituted the
suit for realizing its counter claims in the reference, before filing its
counterclaim in the present proceedings, per se does not merit an
inference that it had waived its right to pursue the counter claims in the
instant proceedings. The Claimants noticeably, did not file any
application under Section 8 in the suit and instead filed their written
22
statement therein. The contention of the Claimants, that as at the time
of institution of the suit and filing of the written statement, the disputes
had already been referred to arbitration, such an application was
inconsequential, lacks in persuasion. The pendency of the present
reference notwithstanding, the Claimant sought to have filed such an
application before the Hon‟ble High Court, apprising it of the
pendency of the reference and seeking appropriate orders from it,
before filing its written statement. The stand of the Respondent that the
parties by their conduct, thus indicated that they were willing to seek
resolution of their disputes before the Hon‟ble High Court, therefore
cannot be lightly disregarded. The plea of the Claimants that they
cannot be compelled to forego their remedies in the reference in terms
of BTA, cannot be sustained in the exceptional facts and circumstances
of the case as the continuation of the instant proceedings would signify
multiplicity of proceedings with the possibility of conflicting decisions
opposed to the rule of public policy.
27. In the context of Section 34 of the Arbitration Act 1940, relating to
stay of legal proceedings, the Hon‟ble High Court of Madras in
Ramasamy Athappan (Supra), after a detailed survey of the renderings
of the Hon‟ble Apex Court amongst others in F.C.I Vs Yadav Engineer
& Contractor,(1982) 2 SCC 499 and General Electric Company Vs
Renusagar Power Company, (1987) 4 SCC 137, enunciated that the
action of the defendant in filing a written statement or taking other
steps in the legal proceedings would tantamount to abandonment of the
right to seek arbitration. Their Lordships held that this principle would
apply even to a case covered by the Act and if the defendant did not
apply under Section 8 thereof, to refer the parties to arbitration, before
submitting its first statement on the substance of the dispute, he would
be guilty of abandonment of the right to seek arbitration.
28. The reservation expressed on behalf of the Claimants that the
Respondent did not endeavour to seek the consent of the additional
parties also does not merit acceptance. As per Rule 28.1 of the Rules,
having regard to the stage at which the request was made by the
Respondent for joinder of additional parties, such impleadment was not
permissible unless all parties including the additional party agreed
thereto in writing. Admittedly the Claimants, who are parties to the
BTA, declined to give consent to such joinder. Rule 28.3 of the Rules
enjoins that all parties to the arbitration agreement shall be required to
give written consent to the joinder of parties in addition to the written
consent of the party to be impleaded. In view of the refusal of the
Claimants to give written consent to the joinder of the additional
parties, sought for by the Respondent, asper the above provisions of the
Rules, any consent by the additional party to be impleaded, would have
been of no consequence.”
23
40. A perusal of the aforesaid findings indicates that the Tribunal appears
to have proceeded on the premise that the petitioner's objections to the
respondent‟s counterclaims, arising from the overlap between the issues
involved in the arbitration and civil suit, somehow rendered the arbitration,
as a whole, as impossible. This expansion of a limited and issue-specific
concern into a general impossibility of the arbitral proceeding seems to be
unwarranted. The petitioner consistently maintained that their own
contractual claims remained amenable to arbitral resolution and notably had
not been carried to any other forum. The crux of the reasoning given by the
Tribunal is the overlapping issues in the arbitration. However, this aspect
has also not been subjected to any close scrutiny. The Tribunal appears to
have accepted the same in a summary and cursory manner, and on mere
assertions. Even if the Tribunal deemed such overlapping to have created
any practical impossibility, it must have examined this aspect so as to
demonstrate such impossibility. Suffice to note that such a discussion is
conspicuously missing.
41. The Tribunal, however, relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in
Sukanya Holdings. The said decision has also been reiterated by Mr. Sood.
However, such reliance is misplaced. The decision in Sukanya Holdings
arose in the context of an application under Section 8 of the Act, as it stood
prior to the 2015 amendment. The Supreme Court, therein, was concerned
with the limited jurisdiction of a civil Court at the threshold stage of
considering whether a dispute ought to be referred to arbitration. In that
context, it was held that Section 8 did not permit bifurcation of causes of
action or parties, and that where the subject matter of the suit was not fully
referable to arbitration, a partial reference could not be ordered. However,
24
the facts of the instant case would indicate that reference to arbitration
preceded the filing of the suit. In such facts, the impermissibility of
bifurcation of the arbitrable disputes and non-arbitrable disputes at the stage
of Section 8 of the Act would have no application.
42. The Tribunal further accepted the respondent‟s contention that the
arbitration was incapable of meaningful continuation because additional
parties, said to be necessary, could not be joined. This conflates procedural
inconvenience with statutory impossibility. The Tribunal did not identify
any legal or factual circumstance demonstrating that disputes between the
signatories could not be adjudicated within the arbitral framework. Instead,
it treated the civil suit as the more convenient and comprehensive platform
and regarded this as a primary reason to terminate the arbitration. The
termination of arbitral proceedings cannot rest on the Tribunal‟s assessment
of which forum might be better placed to dispose of the entirety of the
dispute, especially when the parties have already been ad idem as to the
referability of arbitration for the disputes arising from the contract.
43. Equally untenable is the Tribunal‟s conclusion that the petitioner had
waived arbitration by not invoking Section 8 of the Act in the civil suit and
filing a written statement. A party‟s decision not to move a Section 8
application in a suit filed by the opposite party subsequent to the
commencement of arbitration proceedings cannot be elevated into an
abandonment of the arbitral process. Furthermore, the petitioner filed a
written statement in the civil suit in response to allegations made by the
respondent. In their written statement, they have explicitly reserved their
right to pursue their remedies under the arbitration agreement.
25
44. Pertinent to also note herein that Section 8 of the Act provides a
statutory option to a party to the arbitration agreement, or to any person
claiming through or under such party, to apply before the judicial authority
where a civil action is instituted. Mere failure of a party to invoke the option
does not automatically confer jurisdiction upon the judicial authority. The
non-exercise of the remedy under Section 8 of the Act would not deter the
judicial authority, being this Court in the present case, from independently
exercising its jurisdiction and inherent powers to examine whether the civil
suit is barred under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC).
Reference can be made to the decision of this Court in Master Abhishek
Mehra & Ors. v. DLF Commercial Developers Ltd.14
, wherein the Court
examined the maintainability of the suit therein in view of the constitution of
an Arbitral Tribunal and applied the bar under Section 5 of the Act and
Section 9 of CPC.
45. Importantly, merely because the petitioner participated in a suit that
involves some apparently overlapping issues, as only one of the defendants,
it does not mean that the petitioners‟ own claim under the contract has been
abandoned. A conclusion inviting such drastic consequences cannot be
drawn in a cursory manner. If the arbitration is terminated on mere
institution of the civil suit by the opposite party, it would effectively render
the arbitration mechanism at the mercy of the other side. Moreover, the
petitioner would be prohibited from seeking a fresh referral to arbitration, in
light of the termination of the mandate of the Tribunal, despite the Arbitral
Tribunal being the mutual forum of choice. And not to forget, the petitioner
would invite all these consequences solely because the opposite party chose

14 CS(OS) No. 58/2008
26
to institute a civil suit after subjecting itself to arbitration, thereby,
frustrating the very intent of the arbitration clause in the contract governing
the parties.
46. Moving on, the Tribunal further held that the pendency of parallel
proceedings, the possibility of overlapping issues, or the interest of public
policy justified termination under Section 32(2)(c) of the Act. In a robust
legal system, there could be multiple avenues for a party to vindicate its
rights, and more often than not, the law permits parallel proceedings when
they are intended for different purposes. In such a scenario, mere pendency
of parallel proceedings would not ipso facto render any proceeding as
impossible unless it is affected by a legal bar. Reference can be made to the
recent decision of this Court in Lata Yadav v. Shivakriti Agro Pvt. Ltd &
Ors,
15 wherein, upon a detailed examination of the impugned order passed
by the Arbitral Tribunal therein, the Court reiterated the settled legal
position that the mere pendency, existence, or progression of parallel
criminal or statutory proceedings does not operate as a bar to the
continuation of arbitral proceedings.
47. The Court in Lata Yadav recognized the settled principle that a single
transaction or set of underlying facts may legitimately give rise to multiple
proceedings, civil and criminal, which may proceed simultaneously and
independently within their respective statutory and jurisdictional confines. It
was categorically observed that to accept the pendency of criminal
proceedings, including those under the Prevention of Money Laundering
Act, 2002, as a ground for termination of arbitration would undermine the
arbitral process and enable parties to routinely defeat arbitral jurisdiction by
27
initiating or relying upon parallel proceedings, irrespective of their ultimate
outcome. The Court further relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in
Swiss Timing Ltd. v. Commonwealth Games 2010 Organising Committee16
to reaffirm that there is no rigid or inflexible rule mandating the stay of civil
or arbitral proceedings merely because a criminal trial is pending,
particularly since findings rendered by an arbitral tribunal are not binding on
criminal Courts and, at best, may have only persuasive value. It is pertinent
to note that parallel litigation involving overlapping issues could certainly be
held as „undesirable‟ or „inconvenient‟, but it cannot be termed as
„impossible‟ without there being a prohibition of law against it or there
being a clear demonstration of practical impossibility.
48. At this stage, it is also germane to note that the respondent‟s conduct
also reveals an attempt to approbate and reprobate by first affirming the
arbitral process and thereafter seeking to undermine it through the institution
of a civil suit. Having participated in the arbitration and allowed the
Tribunal to be constituted, the respondent cannot subsequently pivot to the
civil forum and rely on the breadth of its own pleadings to contend that
arbitration has lost efficacy. The respondent‟s assertion that the petitioner
was "blowing hot and cold" goes against itself. It is the respondent who
introduced the civil suit after arbitral proceedings were commenced.
Notably, a party cannot resort to parallel forums and thereafter attempt to
shift the allegation of inconsistency to the other side. Such conduct cannot
be invoked to dilute or defeat the petitioner‟s legitimate invocation of
arbitration under the contract.

15 2025: DHC:3984
16 (2014) 6 SCC 677
28
49. Thus, the Tribunal‟s reasoning falls short of the stringent standard
mandated by Section 32(2)(c) of the Act. There is no identification of any
factor that renders continuation of proceedings before the Arbitral Tribunal
as impossible. Although the termination in question is based on
impossibility, but for the clarity of reasoning and in terms of Section
32(2)(c) of the Act, it may also be noted that there is no demonstration that
the adjudication of the petitioner‟s claims had become unnecessary. Even
otherwise, the lis between the parties is wholly alive, and adjudication is
indeed necessary for putting the respective rights and liabilities to rest.
50. What emerges, instead, is a preference for the civil forum in the
interest of perceived comprehensiveness. As already reiterated hereinabove,
this is insufficient to order termination under the provisions of Section
32(2)(c) of the Act.
51. The Tribunal‟s order, therefore, stands vitiated and is, hereby, set
aside. Let further steps be taken by the parties in accordance with law. No
order as to costs.
52. The instant petition stands disposed of.