COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: CS(COMM) 1059/2025
DATE: 23rd December, 2025
PLAINTIFF: Mr. Sourav Daspatnaik
DEFENDENT: StratGrwoth Business Advisors LLP & Ors.
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Purushaindra Kumar Kaurav

--------JUDGEMENT---------

This civil suit by the plaintiff is, essentially, against defendant nos. 1
to 3 seeking permanent and mandatory injunction restraining them
exercising any rights as shareholders or director of the defendant no.4-
company.
2. The fundamental grievance raised by the plaintiff is premised on the3
ground that the defendant nos. 1 to 3 have, illegally and improperly,
defrauded the plaintiff of huge sums of monies and have fraudulently
grabbed and taken over the entire shareholding of the defendant no.4, and
majority shareholding of the defendant no.5-companies. It is, thus, stated
that defendant nos.4 and 5-companies have been caused significant wrongful
loss.
3. The defendants, in limine, have raised objections on the
maintainability of the suit, essentially, relating to non-compliance with the
mandate under Section 12A of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, the suit
being barred under Section 430 of the Companies Act, 2013 (hereinafter
“Companies Act”), and the existence of an arbitration agreement between
the parties.
4. The case set up in the plaint is that the plaintiff is the Managing
Director at the defendant no. 4-company, Swach Environment Pvt. Ltd.
(hereinafter “Swach”). The defendant no. 5-company, Haldia Water
Services Private Limited (hereinafter “HWSPL”) is a subsidiary of Swach.
The defendant no.1 firm, StratGrwoth Business Advisors LLP (hereinafter
“StratGrwoth”) along with its partners, being defendant nos. 2 and 3, were
business advisors.
5. Between the years 2018 and 2020, Swach appears to have availed
loans exceeding Rs. 67,00,00,000/- (Rupees Sixty Seven Crore only) from a
third-party creditor, SREI (hereinafter “SREI”). Swach defaulted in
repayment of the said loans and SREI initiated proceedings under Section 7
of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. Thereafter, the plaintiff was
introduced to StratGrwoth and defendant nos. 2 to 3 for availing business4
advisory services for Swach. StratGrwoth and defendant nos. 2 to 3 were to
help identify suitable investors for Swach and facilitate capital infusion.
6. In furtherance of the aforesaid arrangement, the following agreements
were executed:
i. Loan-cum-Pledge Agreement dated 17.01.2025 between StratGrwoth,
through defendant no. 2, and the plaintiff (hereinafter “Loan Agreement”);
ii. Share Purchase Agreement dated 17.01.2025 between StratGrwoth,
SREI, and Swach, (hereinafter “SPA”); and
iii. One Time Settlement Agreement dated 31.03.2025 between Swach,
SREI, and StratGrwoth (hereinafter “OTS”).
7. The arrangement was that the plaintiff would advance a loan to
StratGrwoth to acquire hundred per cent shareholding in Swach from SREI,
under the Loan Agreement. The said acquisition of shares would be in terms
of the SPA. Thereafter, the StratGrwoth and defendant nos. 2 to 3 would
find suitable investors to facilitate the clearance of Swach‟s outstanding
dues with SREI in terms of the OTS. Under the Loan Agreement, upon the
transfer of hundred per cent shareholding to StratGrwoth, the shares were to
be pledged in favour of the plaintiff, which he would invoke to gain control
of Swach.
8. However, Swach defaulted in its obligations under the OTS,
allegedly, on account of defaults by defendant nos. 1 to 3. Further, the said
defendants did not pledge the shares in favour of the plaintiff and have,
instead, repaid the loan amount to him. On the other hand, they have set
about to reconstitute the Board of Directors of Swach and HWSPL, and
suspended the plaintiff as a director at Swach and HWSPL.5
9. Mr. Tanmaya Mehta, learned counsel for defendant nos. 1 to 3,
submits that the dispute, essentially, relates to the management of Swach,
and therefore, ought to be raised before the NCLT under the Companies Act.
As such, he submits, this Court does not have jurisdiction to entertain the
suit in view of the bar under Section 430 of the Companies Act. Mr. Rishav
Banerjee, learned counsel for defendant nos. 4 and 5, adopts the submissions
of Mr. Mehta.
10. Mr. J. Sai Deepak, learned senior counsel for the plaintiff, submits
that the wrong sought to be remedied by way of the suit is not the
management of Swach by defendant nos. 1 to 3, but the fraud played by
them on Swach, in so far as they never had any intention to facilitate
infusion of funds into Swach and had, on the basis of the fraudulent
representations, induced the plaintiff and Swach to enter into the aforesaid
arrangement with them. The dispute, he submits, involves serious questions
of fraud, and as such, can only be adjudicated by a Civil Court.
11. He further submits, without prejudice to his contentions, that the
plaintiff being a non-shareholder director, is not a „member‟ for the purposes
of Section 244 of the Companies Act so as to be able to move the NCLT
under Section 241 thereof. Therefore, according to him, the dispute does not
fall within the jurisdiction of the NCLT and therefore, the suit is not barred
under Section 430 of the Companies Act.
12. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
13. If the plaint averments are perused in the context of the prayer, it is
clear that plaintiff seeks to assert rights of Swach and HWSPL in his
capacity as their director. The same is evident from a bare perusal of the
alleged causes of action as claimed in paragraph no. 47 of the plaint, which6
is extracted below, for reference:
“The cause of action first arose in September 2023 when the Defendant
Nos. 1 to 3 induced the Plaintiff at Indian Habitat Centre introduced by
Dr. Ajay Pradhan, Independent Director of Swach in good faith and
which meeting was also attended by Mr. Sundeep Malhotra and Mr.
R.K. Srivastava, with false representations. The cause of action further
arose when the Plaintiff acting for Defendant No.4 executed the
Advisory Mandate/Engagement Letters dated 08.12.2023 and thereafter
again on 03.02.2024. The cause of action further arose when believing
upon the false representations, the Plaintiff was made to part ways with
huge some of monies. The cause of action further arose on 17.01.2025,
when Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 further induced Plaintiff into believing their
false representations by executing a Loan-cum-Pledge Agreement for
Rs. 15,00,000/- which was supposedly used for purchase of the shares.
The cause of action further arose when Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 gave
effect to their grand illegal design by executing a tripartite One Time
Settlement Agreement dated 31.03.2025 between Swach, SEFL, and the
Defendant No. 1 for settlement of Swach’s outstanding dues towards
SEFL. The cause of action further arose on 28.05.2025, when parties
held a meeting in the office of Swach, Avanta Business Centre, West
End Saket, New Delhi when once again Plaintiff requested the
Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 that the pledge agreement be executed at the
earliest especially when the personal guarantee for the funding
agencies for payment of OTS amount is being provided by him. The
cause of action further arose on in August 2025, wherein Defendant
Nos. 1 to 3 stated that Swach should make the payment from its internal
accruals and gave effect to their final step of the grand illegal design to
usurp control of Swach by convening an EGM. The cause of action last
arose on 09.09.2025 when the Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 in furtherance of
their mala-fide intention called for the Annual General Meeting of
Board on 30.09.2025. As such the cause of action is still continuing.”
(Emphasis supplied)
14. It is seen that each cause of action relates to the defendants no. 1 to
3‟s shareholding in Swach and their alleged grand illegal design to usurp
control of the company. The only agreement with defendant nos. 1 to 3,
which the plaintiff is privy to, is the Loan Agreement. However, with the
loan amount under the said Agreement having been repaid to the plaintiff,
no relief is claimed under the same. Therefore, there is no doubt that the7
present suit is in the purported best interests of Swach and HWSPL.
15. However, subsequent to the filing of the suit, the plaintiff has been
suspended as the Managing Director of Swach vide resolution of the
purported meeting of the Board of Directors dated 17.11.2025, and as a
Whole-Time Director at HWSPL vide the resolution of the purported
meeting dated 19.11.2025 of the Board of Directors. This position has been
brought on record by the plaintiff vide I.A. 29148/2025.
16. Even assuming that these two resolutions are non est in the eyes of
law, the question as to whether the plaintiff can institute the civil suit being
merely a director, on behalf of Swach and HWSPL, is an issue which
assumes significance at the threshold.
17. A company is a distinct entity, and it is the company which has to
determine whether it will make anything that is wrong to the company a
subject-matter of litigation, or whether it will take steps itself to prevent the
wrong from being done. If a director is to institute a suit on its behalf, he has
to be authorised to do so by the company. Reference can be made to the
decision of the Calcutta High Court in Al Amin Seatrans Ltd v. Owners and
Party Interested in Vessel M V Loyal Bird.1 The Bombay High Court took a
similar view in its decision in Bsn (Uk) Ltd. and Others v. Janardan
Mohandas Rajan Pillai and Ors. 2 The relevant portion of the said decision
is extracted below, for reference:
“27. A non-proprietary director is entitled to sue the company only in
certain cases. In Pulbrook v. Richmond Consolidated Mining Co.
[1878] 9 Ch 610, it was held that where a director who is improperly
and without cause excluded by his brother directors from the board, he
is entitled to an order restraining such directors from so excluding him.
1AIR 1995 CAL 169.
21993 (3) BOM CR 228.8
The second plaintiff is not attempting to enforce any of his individual
statutory rights. Like any other employee of a company a non-
shareholder director owes duties to the company but has no right to
exercise any of the powers which a shareholder who is a proprietor of
the company can exercise. The case of Jackson v. Minister Bank Ltd.
[1885] 15 LR Ir 356 relied upon by Mr. Chinoy is an Irish case. The
case of Jackson (supra) and also the case of Joint Stock Discount Co. v.
Brown [1869] LR Eq. Cases 381 also relied upon by Mr. Chinoy are
contrary to settled Indian law and as such, have neither persuasive nor
binding effect. These cases even do not hold that a non-shareholder
director can maintain a derivative action on behalf of the company.
Even the articles of association of a company constitute contract
between the company and its members but do not confer any rights on a
person other than a member. The articles of association do not confer
any rights on a non-proprietary director of the company.”
18. In view of the foregoing discussion, what follows is that the suit is not
maintainable because the plaintiff does not have any locus standi to institute
the same as he does not claim to have been authorised by Swach in this
regard. Therefore, there is no cause of action for the plaintiff to institute the
suit, and the plaint is liable to be rejected under Order VII Rule 11(a) of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
19. If the plaintiff seeks to assert any of his rights, the reliefs sought in the
suit will have to be appropriately framed. The nature of the relief prayed in
the present suit cannot be granted at the instance of the plaintiff, as the
plaintiff seeks interference with the internal governance of separate legal
entities i.e., Swach and HWSPL, which otherwise is to be in accordance
with the wishes of the shareholders. The plaintiff, admittedly, does not have
any shareholding in the companies. If he has any grievance, being a director,
in respect of the suspension/termination of his directorship, he may take
recourse to the appropriate legal remedies for enforcement of his terms of
appointment/employment. In the absence of any express authorisation to do
the same, he cannot be allowed to don the mantle of the company itself, and9
file suits on its behalf. Swach and HWSPL, being distinct legal entities, are
fully capable of protecting their interests through their shareholders, and
their directors would be bound by the decisions of the shareholders; whether
or not to institute an action, against any wrongdoing.
20. In view of the foregoing delineation of law, the submissions made by
learned counsel on the other issues are not being dealt with on their merits.
21. Accordingly, the suit along with the pending applications stands
dismissed.
(PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR KAURAV)
JUDGE
DECEMBER 23, 2025
P