COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: ARB.P. 1819/2025
DATE: 20th December, 2025
PLAINTIFF: HT Media Limited
DEFENDENT: Pyramid Finmart Private Limited
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Purushaindra Kumar Kaurav

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. Preeti Goel, wife of Anubhav Goel, age 38 years, having office at 171,
Chitra Vihar, Delhi-110092, do hereby solemnly affirm and state as under;
1. That I am the counsel for the Petitioner in the above matter.
2. That I have, in terms of the order dated 03.11.2025, served the copy of
the Petition alongwith all documents with Application to the Respondentby E-mail and WhatsApp dated 14.11.2025. Copy of the email and
WhatsApp is attached herewith and marked as Annexure-1 (Colly). I have
also served the Respondent through Speed Post, a copy of the receipts as
tracking report of the Speed Post downloaded from the website of the
Postal Department are annexed hereto and marked as Annexure-2
(Collv).
3. That the contents of my affidavit are true and correct.‖
3. Despite service none has appeared for the respondent. Therefore, the
Court has proceeded with the matter.
4. It is the case of the petitioner that the petitioner and the respondent
entered into an Advertising Agreement dated 22.09.2015 (hereinafter
referred to as the Agreement), pursuant to which, the petitioner provided
advertising services to the respondent against a total advertising
commitment of Rs. 3,56,54,187/- (Rupees Three Crore Fifty-Six Lakh Fifty-
Four Thousand One Hundred and Eighty Seven only). Despite having
availed the said services, the respondent allegedly failed to discharge its
payment obligations, resulting in outstanding dues of Rs. 8,17,066/- (Rupees
Eight Lakh Seventeen Thousand and Sixty-Six only), which were repeatedly
demanded and purportedly acknowledged by the respondent through emails
dated 10.01.2024 and 09.05.2024. The respondent’s purported continued
failure to clear the said dues has given rise to disputes between the parties
under the said Agreement.
5. Therefore, Article 7.7 of the said Agreement has been pressed into
service, which reads as under:
―7.7.1 Any and all disputes or differences between HT and the Company
arising out of or in connection with this Agreement or its performance
shall, so far as it is possible, be settled by negotiations between the Parties
amicably through consultation between a representative on behalf of HT
and a representative on behalf of the Company.
7.7.2 Any dispute or difference arising out of or in connection withAgreement, which cannot be amicably settled within 90 (ninety) days, shall
be referred to Arbitration and a Sole Arbitrator shall be appointed in
accordance with the provisions of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
or any amendment thereof The language of Arbitration shall be English
and the venue of Arbitration shall be New Delhi and the award shall be
given at New Delhi.
7.7.3 Each Party shall bear and pay its own costs and expenses in
connection with the arbitration proceedings unless the arbitrators direct
otherwise.‖
6. The law with respect to the scope and standard of judicial scrutiny
under Section 11(6) of the Act has been fairly well settled. This Court in
Pradhaan Air Express Pvt Ltd v. Air Works India Engineering Pvt Ltd1,
has extensively dealt with the scope of interference at the stage of Section
11. Furthermore, in Axis Finance Limited Vs. Mr. Agam Ishwar Trimbak,2
this Court has held that the scope of inquiry under Section 11 of the Act is
limited to a prima facie examination of the existence of an arbitration
agreement. Further, it was also reiterated that objections relating to the
arbitrability of disputes are not to be entertained by a referral Court acting
under Section 8 or 11 of the Act. The relevant extract of the aforesaid
decision reads as under: -
19.In In Re: Interplay , the Supreme Court confined the analysis under
Section 11 of the Act to the existence of an arbitration agreement and
under Section 8 of the Act to the existence and validity of an arbitration
agreement. Under both the provisions, examination was to be made at
the touchstone of Section 7 of the Act. Further, issues pertaining to the
arbitrability of the dispute fell outside the scope of both Section 11(6A)
and Section 8 of the Act. The material part of the judgement of the
Supreme Court in In Re: Interplay reads as under:
164. The 2015 Amendment Act has laid down different
parameters for judicial review under Section 8 and Section 11.
Where Section 8 requires the referral Court to look into the prima
facie existence of a valid arbitration agreement. Section 11
1 2025 SCC OnLine Del 3022
2 2025:DHC:7477confines the Court’s jurisdiction to the examination of the
existence of an arbitration agreement. Although the object and
purpose behind both Sections 8 and 11 is to compel parties to
abide by their contractual understanding, the scope of power of
the referral Courts under the said provisions is intended to be
different. The same is also evident from the fact that Section 37 of
the Arbitration Act allows an appeal from the order of an arbitral
tribunal refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under Section
8, but not from Section 11. Thus, the 2015 Amendment Act has
legislatively overruled the dictum of Patel Engineering (supra)
where it was held that Section 8 and Section 11 are
complementary in nature. Accordingly, the two provisions cannot
be read as laying down a similar standard. 165. The legislature
confined the scope of reference under Section 11(6A) to the
examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement. The use
of the term ―examination‖ in itself connotes that the scope of the
power is limited to a prima facie determination. Since the
Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the requirement of
―existence‖ of an arbitration agreement draws effect from
Section 7 of the Arbitration Act. In Duro Felguera (supra), this
Court held that the referral Courts only need to consider one
aspect to determine the existence of an arbitration agreement –
whether the underlying contract contains an arbitration
agreement which provides for arbitration pertaining to the
disputes which have arisen between the parties to the agreement.
Therefore, the scope of examination under Section 11(6A) should
be confined to the existence of an arbitration agreement on the
basis of Section 7Similarly, the validity of an arbitration
agreement, in view of Section 7, should be restricted to the
requirement of formal validity such as the requirement that the
agreement be in writing. This interpretation also gives true effect
to the doctrine of competence-competence by leaving the issue of
substantive existence and validity of an arbitration agreement to
be decided by arbitral tribunal under Section 16. We accordingly
clarify the position of law laid down in Vidya Drolia (supra) in
the context of Section 8 and Section 11 of the Arbitration Act.
166. The burden of proving the existence of arbitration
agreement generally lies on the party seeking to rely on such
agreement. In jurisdictions such as India, which accept the
doctrine of competencecompetence, only prima facie proof of the
existence of an arbitration agreement must be adduced before the
referral Court. The referral Court is not the appropriate forum to
conduct a minitrial by allowing the parties to adduce the
evidence in regard to the existence or validity of an arbitration
agreement. The determination of the existence and validity of anarbitration agreement on the basis of evidence ought to be left to
the arbitral tribunal. This position of law can also be gauged
from the plain language of the statute. 167. Section 11(6A) uses
the expression ―examination of the existence of an arbitration
agreement.‖ The purport of using the word ―examination‖
connotes that the legislature intends that the referral Court has to
inspect or scrutinize the dealings between the parties for the
existence of an arbitration agreement. Moreover, the expression
―examination‖ does not connote or imply a laborious or
contested inquiry. On the other hand, Section 16 provides that the
arbitral tribunal can ―rule‖ on its jurisdiction, including the
existence and validity of an arbitration agreement. A ―ruling‖
connotes adjudication of disputes after admitting evidence from
the parties. Therefore, it is evident that the referral Court is only
required to examine the existence of arbitration agreements,
whereas the arbitral tribunal ought to rule on its jurisdiction,
including the issues pertaining to the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement. A similar view was adopted by this Court
in Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd.‖ [Emphasis
supplied]
20. The effect of In Re: Interplay was further explained by a Three Judge
Bench of the Supreme Court in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish
Spinning3 wherein the Court declared Vidya Drolia and NTPC Ltd.’s
findings qua scope of inquiry under Section 8 and Section 11 of the Act to
no longer be compatible with modern principles of arbitration. The
material portions of the judgement read as under:
―114. In view of the observations made by this Court in In Re :
Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of enquiry at the stage
of appointment of arbitrator is limited to the scrutiny of prima
facie existence of the arbitration agreement, and nothing else.
For this reason, we find it difficult to hold that the observations
made in Vidya Drolia (supra) and adopted in NTPC v. SPML
(supra) that the jurisdiction of the referral Court when dealing
with the issue of ―accord and satisfaction‖ under Section 11
extends to weeding out ex-facie non-arbitrable and frivolous
disputes would continue to apply despite the subsequent decision
in In Re : Interplay (supra). ... 118. Tests like the ―eye of the
needle‖ and ―ex-facie meritless‖, although try to minimise the
extent of judicial interference, yet they require the referral Court
to examine contested facts and appreciate prima facie evidence
(however limited the scope of enquiry may be) and thus are not in
conformity with the principles of modern arbitration which place
3 2024 SCC OnLine SC 1754arbitral autonomy and judicial non-interference on the highest
pedestal.‖ [Emphasis supplied]
21. Similarly, in BGM and M-RPL-JMCT (JV) v. Eastern Coalfields Ltd4
the Supreme Court succinctly explained the effect of In Re: Interplay on a
Referral Court’s powers under Section 11 of the Act. The relevant part of
the judgement is as under:
15. ...
(a) Section 11 confines the Court's jurisdiction to the examination
regarding the existence of an arbitration agreement.
(b) The use of the term ―examination‖ in itself connotes that the
scope of the power is limited to a prima facie determination.
(c) Referral Courts only need to consider one aspect to
determine the existence of an arbitration agreement — whether
the underlying contract contains an arbitration agreement which
provides for arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have
arisen between the parties to the agreement. Therefore, the scope
of examination under Section 11(6-A) should be confined to the
existence of an arbitration agreement on the basis of Section 7.
Such a legal approach will help the Referral Court in weeding
out prima facie non-existent arbitration agreements.
(d) The purport of using the word ―examination‖ connotes that
the legislature intends that the Referral Court has to inspect or
scrutinise the dealings between the parties for the existence of an
arbitration agreement. However, the expression ―examination‖
does not connote or imply a laborious or contested inquiry.
(e) The burden of proving the existence of arbitration agreement
generally lies on the party seeking to rely on such agreement.
Only prima facie proof of the existence of an arbitration
agreement must be adduced before the Referral Court. The
Referral Court is not the appropriate forum to conduct a minitrial by allowing the parties to adduce the evidence in regard to
the existence or validity of an arbitration agreement. The
determination of the existence and validity of an arbitration
agreement on the basis of evidence ought to be left to the Arbitral
Tribunal.
(f) Section 16 provides that the Arbitral Tribunal can ―rule‖ on
its jurisdiction, including the existence and validity of an
arbitration agreement. A ―ruling‖ connotes adjudication of
disputes after admitting evidence from the parties. Therefore,
4 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1471when the Referral Court renders a prima facie opinion, neither
the Arbitral Tribunal, nor the Court enforcing the arbitral award
is bound by such a prima facie view. If a prima facie view as to
the existence of an arbitration agreement is taken by the Referral
Court, it still allows the Arbitral Tribunal to examine the issue in
depth.
[Emphasis supplied]
22. Thus from the above-mentioned authorities it is clear that a Court’s
scope of inquiry under Section 11 of the Act has been limited to a prima
facie examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement while the
adjudication under Section 8 is to be made for both existence and
validity. Further, the examination so undertaken under both the said
provisions must be within the confines of Section 7 of the Act. Objections
relating to arbitrability of disputes are not to be entertained by a referral
Court acting under Section 8 or 11 of the Act.‖
7. In view of the fact that disputes have arisen between the parties and
there is an arbitration clause in the contract, Mr. Arvind Anand (Mobile No.9810577555, Email ID – advoarvindanand@gmail.com) is appointed as the
sole Arbitrator.
8. The Sole Arbitrator may proceed with the arbitration proceedings,
subject to furnishing to the parties the requisite disclosures as required under
Section 12 of the Act.
9. The Sole Arbitrator shall be entitled to fee in accordance with the IV
Schedule of the Act or as may otherwise be agreed to between the parties
and the learned Sole Arbitrator.
10. The parties shall share the arbitrator's fee and arbitral cost, equally.
11. All rights and contentions of the parties in relation to the
claims/counter claims are kept open, to be decided by the Sole Arbitrator on
their merits, in accordance with law.
12. Needless to state, nothing in this order shall be construed as an
expression of opinion of this Court on the merits of the controversy. Allrights and contentions of the parties in this regard are reserved. Let a copy
of the instant order be sent to the Sole Arbitrator through electronic mode as
well.
13. Accordingly, the instant petition stands disposed of.
PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR KAURAV, J
DECEMBER 20, 2025/p/mj