COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: O.M.P.(I) (COMM.) 464/2025, I.A. 27581/2025, I.A. 30059/2025
DATE: 06.01.2026
PLAINTIFF: JLT ENERGY 9 SAS
DEFENDANT: HINDUSTAN CLEAN ENERGY LIMITED, PERIDOT POWER VENTURES PRIVATE LIMITED, SOLITAIRE BTN SOLAR PRIVATE LIMITED
JUDGE: Justice PURUSHAINDRA KUMAR KAURAV

----JUDGMENT-----

The petitioner has filed the instant petition under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter ―the Act‖) seeking a
prohibitory injunction restraining the respondents from creating any thirdparty rights or interest in the assets or securities of respondent nos. 3 and 4,
except as expressly permitted under the Securities Purchase Agreements
dated 31.12.2024 (‗SPAs‘) and with the petitioner‘s prior written consent.
I. FACTUAL MATRIX
2. The petitioner JLT Energy 9 SAS is a company incorporated under
the laws of France, belonging to a multinational group Technique Solaire,
engaged in the business of developing renewable energy projects. The
respondent no. 1 and 2 are Hindustan Cleanenergy Ltd. and Peridot Power
Ventures Ltd. respectively, and they own 100% shareholding of respondent
no. 3 and 4 companies, which own and operate ground-mounted solar power
projects in the State of Tamil Nadu and Bihar respectively.
3. The dispute between the parties emanates from the execution of two
SPAs dated 31.12.2024 (hereinafter ―said SPAs‖) between the petitioner
and respondents for the acquisition of the said solar power projects in the
State of Tamil Nadu (hereinafter ―said Agreement‖/―Tamil Nadu SPA‖)
and Bihar (hereinafter ―Bihar SPA‖). Importantly, the said SPAs are
intrinsically interconnected. Schedule VII of the Bihar SPA stipulates that
the Closing of the Tamil Nadu SPA constitutes a Condition Precedent
(―CP‖) to the Closing of the Bihar SPA. Effectively, therefore, the lis
between the parties pertains to the Tamil Nadu SPA.
5
4. The said SPAs entered into between the parties contain an arbitration
clause at 16.2(b)-(c), which provides that if parties are unable to resolve
their dispute within a period of 30 business days, the same shall be resolved
by arbitration administered by the Singapore International Arbitration
Centre (‗SIAC’) in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of SIAC
(hereinafter ―SIAC Rules‖) for the time being in force. The said arbitration
clause has been invoked by the petitioner, on 07.08.2025 by filing of an
Emergency Relief Application before the SIAC, which ultimately
culminated into the order dated 27.08.2025, containing the dispositive
section of its award, with the detailed award having been passed on
28.08.2025. The prayer made therein was granted by the learned emergency
arbitrator.
5. Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner Mr. Rajshekhar
Rao has apprised this Court that the said award has been extended from time
to time, and continues to be in force till date. However, he submits that the
said award would require enforcement proceedings in Indian courts for the
respondents to be meaningfully bound by it, thus the reliefs in the present
Section 9 petition are prayed for.
6. The learned senior counsel were then heard on 03.12.2025,
09.12.2025 and 17.12.2025, and the judgements relied upon by them were
also carefully perused. The submissions advanced by them could be summed
up as under.
6
II. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
7. Mr. Rajshekhar Rao, learned senior counsel contends that the
petitioner is ready and willing to perform its obligations under the said
SPAs, and in furtherance of it, is willing to make any payments required, to
display its bona fides. He submits that a strong prima facie case exists in
favour of the petitioner as respondents deliberately caused the nonfulfilment of the CPs, breached their good faith obligations under the said
SPAs, and evidently caused the said SPAs to collapse owing to their own
fault, of which they cannot be allowed to take benefit.
8. It is further argued that despite the said SPAs, today, having stood
terminated, the same does not prevent an injunctive protective relief from
being granted. It is also contended by Mr. Rao that in actuality the CP
concerning the change of land use, became a condition subsequent (―CS‖)
owing to — (1) a meeting between parties dated 30.01.2025; and/or (2) the
amendment to the Tamil Nadu SPA.
9. Per contra, Mr. Jayant Mehta, learned senior counsel, and for a brief
time Mr. Atul S. Mathur, learned counsel, appearing for the respondents
submit that the said SPAs contain a self-collapsing mechanism under Clause
5.6, by the operation of which the SPAs stood terminated. Learned senior
counsel contends, that there is no prima facie case which the petitioner can
establish, inter alia, owing to the petitioner seeking specific performance of
an agreement which does not subsist as on date. Mr. Mehta submits that the
fate of the SPAs was contingent upon the concerned government authorities
granting permission under the relevant State Act and the Rules made
7
thereunder, and if the same did not fructify, specific performance in relation
to it cannot be granted.
10. Learned senior counsel submits that the CP pertaining to change of
land use was not converted into a CS, and further that it could not have been
converted into the same as the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
(hereinafter ―FEMA‖) prohibits purchase of agricultural land by a nonresident.
III. ANALYSIS
11. At the outset, it may be considered that though there is an interim
award passed by the emergency arbitrator appointed by SIAC, Mr. Rao
fairly submitted that the petitioner has to independently satisfy the Court of
it being entitled to interim protection. In support of this proposition, the
decision of this Court in Raffles Design International (India) (P) Ltd. v.
Educomp Professional Education Ltd.1
assumes significance. Para. 105
thereof reads as under:
―105. However, in my view, a party seeking interim measures cannot
be precluded from doing so only for the reason that it had obtained a
similar order from an arbitral tribunal. Needless to state that the
question whether the interim orders should be granted under section
9 of the Act or not would have to be considered by the Courts
independent of the orders passed by the arbitral tribunal. Recourse
to Section 9 of the Act is not available for the purpose of enforcing the
orders of the arbitral tribunal; but that does not mean that the Court
cannot independently apply its mind and grant interim relief in cases
where it is warranted.‖
(Emphasis supplied)

1
2016 SCC OnLine Del 5521.
8
12. In light of the nature of controversy, it becomes necessary to begin
with an examination of the relevant clauses of the said Agreement. Clause 5
of the Tamil Nadu SPA, entered into between the parties, is titled
―Conditions Precedent and Pre-Closing Actions‖ and provides that the
obligations of the petitioner/purchaser and the respondents/sellers to
purchase/sell securities are subject to the fulfillment of each of the
conditions set out in Part A and Part B of Schedule VII (Conditions
Precedent), respectively. Clause 11 of Part A of Schedule VII (Conditions
Precedent) provides the requirement of the respondents converting the
project land into the non-agricultural category (hereinafter ―NA Conversion
Condition‖) and it reads as under:
―The Company shall have obtained: (a) the definitive and final
conversion order for the Project Land to non-agricultural from the
Local Town Panchayat under Section 47 of the Tamil Nadu Town and
Country Planning Act 1971, and (b) a confirmation from the Local
Town Panchayat that all applicable fines and penalties in connection
with utilisation of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes
have been paid by the Company (collectively, the NA Conversion
Condition).‖
13. The consequence of the non-fulfilment of this condition precedent is
provided for under Clause 5.6 of the said Agreement, which reads as under:
―5.6 It is hereby agreed between the Parties, that in the event the
Conditions Precedent are not fulfilled by: (a) the Sellers and/or the
Company to the Purchaser’s satisfaction (acting reasonably in its sole
discretion) or (b) the Purchaser to the Sellers’ satisfaction (acting
reasonably in its sole discretion) on or before the Closing Long Stop
Date, then this Agreement shall automatically terminate.‖
14. A bare perusal of the aforenoted clause would reveal that in the event
the CPs are not fulfilled, to the other party‘s satisfaction, on or before the
Closing Long Stop Date, the Agreement shall automatically terminate. The
9
parties are ad idem that the NA Conversion Condition has not been fulfilled.
However, Mr. Rao seeks to overcome this non-fulfilment on two grounds—
first, by claiming that the said CP effectively became a CS and, therefore,
Clause 5.6 does not apply; and second, the non-fulfilment of the NA
Conversion Condition is owing to the fault of the respondents, and they
cannot take advantage of their own wrong. Both the contentions require a
careful consideration.
A. THE ARGUMENT OF THE NA CONVERSION CONDITION
PRECEDENT BECOMING A CONDITION SUBSEQUENT
15. The rationale for arguing this point is to exclude the NA Conversion
Condition from the lists of CPs, and, therefore, to seek an escape from the
consequence of its non-fulfilment under Clause 5.6. The claim of the said
condition becoming a CS rests on two submissions. First, that in a meeting
of the parties dated 30.01.2025, the said condition became a CS; and second,
that vide an amendment to the SPA dated 03.06.2025, the said condition
became a CS. Therefore, the submission primary suggests towards a
modification/amendment of the relevant clause of the said Agreement to
convert the CP regarding NA Land Conversion into a CS.
16. Before delving into the documents filed by the parties, the
requirement associated with amendment, modification or waiver of, the
terms of the SPAs may be considered. Clause 17.5 of the said Agreement
requires a modification, amendment, or waiver of any of the provisions of
the contract to be made in writing specifically referring to the contract and
duly signed by each of the parties to the agreement. Further, Clause 17.10
10
titled ―No waiver‖ provides that the rights of the parties under the contract
may be waived only in writing and specifically. The said clauses read as
under:
“17.5 Amendments
No modification, amendment or waiver of any of the provisions of this
Agreement shall be effective unless made in writing specifically
referring to this Agreement and duly signed by each of the Parties.
…
17.10 No waiver
(a) The rights of each Party under this Agreement:
(i) may be exercised as often as necessary;
(ii) except as otherwise expressly provided in this Agreement,
are cumulative and not exclusive of rights and remedies provided by
the Applicable Law; and
(iii) may be waived only in writing and specifically.
(b) Delay in exercising or non-exercise of any such right is not a
waiver of that right.
(c) No forbearance, indulgence or relaxation of any Party at any
time to require performance of any provision of this Agreement shall
in any way affect, diminish or prejudice the right of such Party to
require performance of the same provision, and any waiver or
acquiescence by any Party of any breach of any provision of this
Agreement shall not be construed as a waiver or acquiescence of any
continuing or succeeding breach of such provisions, a waiver of any
right under or arising out of this Agreement or acquiescence to or
recognition of rights and/or position other than as expressly stipulated
in this Agreement.‖
(Emphasis supplied)
17. The only document attached by the petitioner pertaining to the alleged
meeting dated 30.01.2025 is an email dated 30.01.2025 sent by the petitioner
to the respondents containing a minutes of meeting, the same reads as under:
―Dear Ratul,
Thank you for your time earlier today for the meeting.
I am stating out the minutes for everyone’s reference.
1. Hindustan power team is arranging an NA document from
Tehsildar which should (i) satisfy the Lender (REC) condition on
compliance [1% additional penalty as well as continuation of
11
Hindustan power corporate guarantee has to continue until NA
condition is satisfied] (ii) serve as an additional interim document
for us to proceed with the closing.
2. As a CS, Vacant land tax demand issue will be settled by
Hindustan power and then Hindustan power team will approach
the Town planning department for further issuance of the NA
order under Section 47 of the Tamil Nadu Town and Country
Planning Act 1971. Technique Solaire will go ahead with the
holdback amount in escrow as contemplated in the SPA and
proceed with the closing.
3. In case closing can be done before the REC compliance condition
is fulfilled then the hold back amount has to be topped up with the
potential FY2024-25 lender penalty (1% penalty of outstanding).
If REC compliance condition is satisfied before closing then there
is no need for penalty holdback.
With above points in mind, looking forward to receiving the draft
closing documents and escrow bank introduction from your team so as
to take the process forward to closing.‖
18. The said minutes reflect, not an agreement between the parties, but a
proposal made by the petitioner during the course of its interaction with the
respondents. Further, agreement if any, is not in writing, nor is signed by the
parties to the said Agreement. The purported amendment whereby the CP is
claimed/asserted to have been converted into a CS does not comply with the
requirement of Clause 17.5 of the said Agreement, and to that extent, it is
not a modification which can be recognized in the eyes of law.
19. The petitioner further relies upon an alleged acceptance by the
respondent of a draft dated 03.06.2025 to contend that the NA Conversion
Condition became an CS. The facts, at this stage become rather interesting.
20. The parties have admitted that the Closing Long Stop Date (‗CLSD‘)
under the said SPAs, which originally stood at 30.04.2025 was extended to
31.05.2025 with mutual consent. There is, however, a dispute whether the
CLSD was extended till 30.06.2025. The said extension was provided for in
12
a draft incorporating an amendment to the said Agreement (hereinafter ―said
Amendment‖), which also as per the petitioner provided for, inter alia, the
NA Conversion Condition to become an CS. Specifically, under the said
Amendment, it may be seen that Clause 2.1(a) provided that the CLSD was
to mean 30.06.2025 under the said Agreement. Further, Clause 2.1(e)
deleted the erstwhile Clause 5.7 of the said Agreement, and substituted it
with a new Clause 5.7, which made the NA Conversion Condition a CS. The
material parts of said Amendment read as under:
―2. AMENDMENTS TO THE SPA
2.1. The amendments to the provisions of the SPA as set out
hereinafter are reflected in italicised typeface.
(a) The definition of Closing Long Stop Date under Clause 1.1 of
the SPA shall be deleted in its entirety and substituted as follows:
“Closing Long Stop Date means 30 June 2025;”
…
(e) Clause 5.7 of the SPA shall be deleted in its entirety and
substituted as follows:
“5.7 NA Conversion Condition
5.7.1. Subject to completion of all other Conditions Precedent, in
case the Sellers are unable to satisfy the NA Conversion Condition
after completion of the Restructuring Exercise, then in such case
the Purchaser shall notify the Sellers of their intention to proceed
with Closing (NA Conversion Event Notice).
5.7.2. Upon receipt of the NA Conversion Event Notice and
subject to compliance with Clause 5.5, the Parties shall proceed
with Closing of the Transaction and the NA Conversion Condition
shall become a Conditions Subsequent which shall be completed
on or before expiry of the Escrow Period (NA Conversion
Extended Period) and holdback an amount of INR 100,000,000
(Indian Rupees One Hundred million only) less any amount paid or
deposited by the Sellers with the Governmental Authority towards
the NA Conversion Conditions (NA Conversion Holdback Amount)
from the Purchase Consideration shall be deposited in the Escrow
Account and shall be payable to the Sellers in the manner and
upon the occurrence of the events specified in Clause 4.4.4(b).
Provided that in case the relevant Governmental Authority reduces
the amount of vacant land tax or other levy payable by the
Company for complying with the NA Conversion Conditions (“NA
13
Reduction Amount”) then such NA Reduction Amount shall stand
reduced from the NA Conversion Holdback Amount and only such
amount remaining after deduction of the NA Reduction Amount
shall be deemed to constitute the NA Conversion Holdback Amount
hereunder.
5.7.3. If the Sellers are unable to procure completion of the NA
Conversion Condition to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Purchaser within the time period specified in Clause 5.7.2, then:
(a) the Purchaser shall have no obligation to pay, and the Sellers
shall not be entitled to receive, the NA Conversion Holdback
Amount; (b) the Purchaser shall be entitled to pursue the NA
Conversion Condition in the manner determined in its sole
discretion, and the Sellers shall reasonably cooperate with the
Purchaser with respect to the completion of the NA Conversion
Condition; and (c) other than as specified in this Clause 5.7.3, the
Sellers shall have no further obligation or liability with respect to
completion of the NA Conversion Condition.‖
21. Before delving into the communication between the parties pertaining
to the said Amendment. A few aspects of the amendment document itself
may be considered.
22. The first page of the said Amendment bears an endorsement at the top
right the following words–―Draft for discussion purposes only RS Revised
Draft – 2 June 2025‖. Subsequently, every page of the said Amendment
contains the words ―Draft for discussion purposes only‖. Internal page 2,
which comes after the opening/cover page of the said amendment, begins
with the words ―To be executed on stamp paper of adequate value‖. Internal
page 7 of the said Amendment then provides the signature page for the
petitioner/purchaser which evinces that the said Amendment was to be
signed by one Mr. Manu Bishnoi, the authorized signatory of the petitioner.
The date importantly, has been left blank. Similarly, internal pages 8, 9, 10
of the said Amendment then provide the signature pages for respondent nos.
1, 2, and 3, to be signed by their respective authorised directors. Again, the
14
signature dates are left empty. Notably, the said Amendment is also left
undated.
23. In terms of the communication between the parties, it appears that on
03.06.2025 at 6:12 PM one Bhavik Oza, from the legal department of
respondent no. 1, sent an email to the petitioner which contained the said
Amendment document. The said email reads as under:
―From: bhavik.oza
Date: Tuesday, 3 June 2025 at 6:12 PM
To: Prashant SHAH
Cc: ashok.gupta, deepshikha.singh, sandeep.kaushik, lalit.s, Manu
BISHNOI, punit.agrawal
Subject: RE: Sanctions from REC- Amendment in SPA
Dear Prashant,
Please find attached the final draft of the Agreement.
Bhavik Oza
Legal
Hindustan Power‖
24. The said email was replied to on the very same day at 6:17 PM by one
Manu Bishnoi, the representative of the petitioner, stating that the
amendment is acceptable and that the petitioner await the respondents‘
instructions to sign. The said email reads as under:
“From: Manu BISHNOI
Sent: Tuesday, June 3, 2025 6:17 PM
To: bhavik.oza; deepshikha.singh; Prashant SHAH
Cc: ashok.gupta; sandeep.kaushik; lalit.jain; punit.agrawal; Gautier
FRANTZ
Subject: RE: Sanctions from REC- Amendment in SPA
Hello Bhavik,
Thanks for sharing the final amendment draft. We confirm the
15
amendment is good to go from our side. Based on my call with
Deepshikha, we further await your instructions to sign.
Best Regards/Cordialement
Manu Bishnoi
Director, India”
(Emphasis supplied)
25. Thereafter, on 05.06.2022 i.e., about two days after the last email, the
petitioner, through its legal counsel one Prashant Shah sent an email to the
respondents attaching a revised draft of the amendment agreement to the
said Agreement. The said email reads as under:
―From: Prashant SHAH
Sent: 05 June 2025 16:22
To: Manu BISHNOI; bhavik.oza; deepshikha.singh
Cc: ashok.gupta; sandeep.kaushik; lalit.jain; punit.agrawal; Gautier
FRANTZ
Subject: Re: Sanctions from REC- Amendment in SPA
Attachments: First Amendment Agreement (Solitaire SPA) 5 June
2025 VPS Revised.docx
Dear all,
Please see attached the revised draft of the Amendment Agreement for
Tamil Nadu basis our discussions yesterday.
Please do let us know should you wish to discuss. Look forward to
hearing from you soon.
Best regards,
Prashant‖
26. Notably, in the legal notice dated 23.06.2025 (hereinafter ―said Legal
Notice‖), the petitioner called upon the respondents to, inter alia, sign the
said Amendment, thereby, admitting to its non-execution till then. The
material portion of the said notice reads as under:
―24. …Given Our Client’s continued intent and willingness to
complete the transactions agreed upon, Our Client calls upon the
16
Sellers to undertake the following actions in compliance with their
obligations under the Agreements:
…
(iv) Sellers shall execute the final form amendment agreements (as
attached) as agreed by the Parties on June 03, 2025 inter alia
extending the CLSD to June 30, 2025 within three [3] business days of
receiving this Notice.‖
27. The trailing discussion noted above leads to the prima facie
conclusions that — first, the said Amendment document was non-binding,
and contained sufficient textual indications of it being a mere discussion
draft; and second, the parties to the said Agreement have not till date
signed/executed the said Amendment or any other document which
modifies/amends the said SPAs so as to extend the CLSD to 30.06.2025 and
make the NA Conversion Condition a CS. Thus, the draft never attained
finality and assumed binding value, which was contingent upon a specified
procedure. Importantly, the signature pages at internal pages 7-10 of the said
Amendment, appear to have been put to comply with the procedure provided
for under Clause 17.5, which requires each of the parties to the said
Agreement, to sign a given amendment, for it to have effect. The rationale
for the said Legal Notice seeking the execution of the said Amendment, was
again, to comply with the requirements of Clause 17.5. Notably, also, the
email dated 03.06.2025 from the petitioner, by using the expression ―we
further await your instructions to sign‖ further evinces the intention of the
petitioner to be bound by, the mechanism for amendment provided for under
Clause 17.5.
28. Reliance on any other document/conduct as amending the said SPAs
would fall ill of the mechanism provided for under the said Agreement for
17
amendment, and naturally, the will of the parties expressed through the said
Agreement.
29. At this stage, two specific arguments of Mr. Rao may be considered.
First, while relying on Clause 5.8.3 read with Clause 1.2(f) of the said
Agreement, it is contended by the learned senior counsel that the CLSD can
be extended by way of written email exchange, and there is no need for an
amendment to the said Agreement. The said clauses provide, inter alia, that
―the parties may discuss in good faith, to extend the Closing Long Stop Date
by such number of days as may be agreed by the Parties in writing‖. While a
bare perusal of Clause 5.8.3 would reveal its inapplicability, even if for the
sake of analysis, the argument was to be accepted, and the CLSD was
deemed to have been extended till 30.06.2025, it is rather obvious that the
said date has also passed. This argument, in particular, does not relate to the
NA Conversion Condition becoming a CS, and in the absence of that, even
if CLSD was extended till 30.06.2025, the automatic termination provided
for under Clause 5.6 of the said Agreement, would naturally apply. In the
absence of any material supporting the formal conversion of the CP into a
CS, termination would have its intended effect.
30. Secondly, learned senior counsel argued that the NA Conversion
Condition CP was waived by the procedure provided for under the said
Agreement. At the outset, there is no ―specific‖ waiver of the NA
Conversion Condition as is required by Clause 17.10 of the said Agreement.
There is but a purported amendment, which also, falls ill of the procedure
provided for under the said Agreement. Even if it is assumed that a waiver
18
was provided for under the said Agreement, it was to be governed by Clause
17.5 which deals with amendments, and includes within it the act of waiver.
31. Further, independent of the above analysis, it could be observed that
the NA Conversion Condition also does not appear to be a CP which could
be simplicitor waived. Clause 5.3 is the general provision which allows a
party to waive a CP or to treat it as a CS. A waiver of a CP is fundamentally
different from its fulfilment being deferred and it being treated as a CS; and
the said Agreement also takes note of the said distinction in its clauses.
32. Importantly, the NA Conversion Condition is the only CP which is
specifically dealt with in the substantive part of the contract. While the
treatment of other CPs seems to be governed by Clauses 5.3 and 5.5 read
with the VIIth Schedule. Clause 5.7 titled ―NA Conversion Condition‖, on
the other hand, is the specific Clause dealing with the manner in which the
said CP could be converted into an CS.
2
There is no clause that deals with a
waiver of the said Condition.
33. The NA Conversion Condition being governed by Clause 5.7 would
not fall within the scope of Clause 5.3, as the specific clause would prevail
over the general clause.3
The lack of a provision dealing with the waiver of
the NA Conversion Condition, also appears to be deliberate.4
It is, therefore,
the case that the NA Conversion Condition could not have been waived, but

2 The said procedure has also not been followed.
3 Generalia non specialibus derogant, see The Interpretation of Contracts, Sir Kim Lewison, 5th Ed.,
Sweet and Maxwell, Chapter 7, ‗The Canons of Construction‘, Pg. 350 – 352.
4 Expressio unius est exclusio alterius, see The Interpretation of Contracts, Sir Kim Lewison, 5th Ed.,
Sweet and Maxwell, Chapter 7, ‗The Canons of Construction‘, Pg. 352-358.
19
only converted into a CS as per the mechanism provided for under Clause
5.7.
34. It is possible to also contend that the requirement under the said
Agreement, for an amendment to be signed by the parties, could itself be
amended through the conduct of the parties. However, the petitioner‘s email
dated 03.06.2025 as also the said Legal Notice, evince the petitioner not
having amended/waived such a requirement, assuming such an
amendment/waiver is possible in law.
35. It is important to clarify that the finding qua the NA Conversion
Condition not being capable of being waived is an independent and
additional ground, which in exclusion to the findings detailed in paras 29
and 30, which assumes the said CP to be capable of being waived, but
ultimately not complying with the requirements of a waiver under the said
Agreement. Be that as it may, either way the grounds of waiver or
amendment is not made out.
36. Further, it also appears that the decision of the respondents to not
extend the CLSD to 30.06.2025 was a conscious commercial decision
undertaken by them. The scheme of the transaction, as it bears from the
Agreement, appears to be a fast paced acquisition of shares contingent upon
the NA Conversion Condition being granted, and but for that happening, the
SPA collapsing. For this reason the purchase price under the said Agreement
was fixed as on 01.01.2024 and no advance money was paid to the
respondents. Naturally, a given party may want to get out of a deal which
has lasted its course, and which did not ultimately fructify.
20
37. The reliance placed by Mr. Rao on Trimex International FZE Ltd. v.
Vedanta Aluminium Ltd.5
is also misplaced as the said case related to the
issue of whether an arbitration agreement has come into existence owing to
email exchanges. The said case did not deal with the issue of an amendment
undertaken in violation of the express procedure provided for in the contract
itself.
38. From the discussion above, it could prima facie be concluded that the
NA Conversion Condition neither became a CS nor was the CLSD extended
to 30.06.2025. In light of the this finding, the issue as to whether the NA
Conversion Condition could have ever become a CS owing to it seeking
non-compliance with FEMA need not be gone into. However, if the same is
considered appropriate, the learned arbitrator, if he is called upon to
determine, may adjudicate upon it without being influenced by this Court‘s
observations.
B. THE ARGUMENT OF CP REMAINING UNFULFILLED OWING
TO THE RESPONDENTS’ FAULT
39. The other ground taken by the petitioner to overcome the rigours of
Clause 5.6 of the said Agreement may now be considered. It is submitted by
the learned senior counsel for the petitioner that the said clause has no
application as the NA Conversion Condition remained unfulfilled owing to
the respondents‘ own fault, and they cannot be allowed to take advantage of
their own wrong.

5
(2010) 3 SCC 1.
21
40. The respondents have issued on 30.01.2025, 12.02.2025, 16.03.2025,
16.05.2025 letters (hereinafter ―said Letters‖) to the Executive Officer,
Gangavarpatti Town Panchayat, Theni District, which is the appropriate
―Local Authority‖ under Rule 2(v) read with Rule 9 of the Tamil Nadu
Change of Land Use (From Agricultural to Non Agricultural Purposes in
Non Planning Areas) Rules, 2017, for the purposes of obtaining a change of
land use for satisfying the NA Conversion Condition.
41. The petitioner contends more was to be done, to which the
respondents have put on record flight tickets of their officers visiting the
office of the concerned authority; the veracity of the intended purpose of the
visits is then doubted by the petitioner. The Court is a bit unsure what really
would satisfy the petitioner. If there was in fact a particular form of effort
that was required on the part of the respondents, the same should have been
provided for in the said Agreement. Additionally, on the respondents bona
fides, it may also be noted that without there being an obligation, in good
faith, the respondents extended the CLSD from 30.04.2025 to 31.05.2025.
42. Thus, at the stage of this Section 9 petition, in the absence of evidence
having been led, strictly on the basis of the material on record, a prima facie
conclusion regarding the respondents‘ bad faith cannot be made out.
Assuming, however, that bad faith is indeed made out, the consequences
may be analysed.
43. Clause 5.6 of the said Agreement, does not in itself, create a
distinction between cases where non-fulfilment of CP is due to a party‘s
fault and where it is as a consequence of no-fault. The said clause
22
categorically provides that in the event a CP is not fulfilled by the sellers
and/or the company (i.e., the respondents), to the purchaser‘s satisfaction
(acting reasonably in its sole discretion), on or before the CLSD, the
agreement shall automatically terminate. The clause resembles the classic
condition of satisfaction. Chitty on Contracts6
has dealt with such clauses in
the following words:
―Condition of “satisfaction”
The possibility of excluding the implied term discussed in para. 2-162
above by an express contrary provision⁸⁸⁹ is further illustrated by a
provision making the operation of a contract depend on the
“satisfaction” of one of the parties with the subject-matter or other
aspects relating to the other’s performance.⁸⁹⁰ Thus it has been held
that there was no contract where a house was bought “subject to
satisfactory mortgage”,⁸⁹¹ and where a boat was bought “subject to
satisfactory survey”⁸⁹² it was held that the buyer was not bound if he
expressed his dissatisfaction,⁸⁹³ in spite of the fact that such
expression was a deliberate act on his part which prevented the
occurrence of the condition. The same is true where goods are
bought on approval and the buyer does not approve them,⁸⁹⁴ and
where an offer of employment is made “subject to satisfactory
references”, and the prospective employer does not regard the
references as satisfactory.⁸⁹⁵ There is some apparent conflict in the
authorities on the question whether the law imposes any restriction on
the freedom of action of the party on whose satisfaction the operation
of the contract depends. In one case⁸⁹⁶ a proposed royalty agreement
relating to the use by a manufacturer of an invention was “subject to
detailed evaluation of production and marketing feasibility” by the
manufacturer. It was held that his discretion whether to enter into the
contract was “unfettered by any obligation to act reasonably or in
good faith”⁸⁹⁷ and that, as his satisfaction had not been
communicated⁸⁹⁸ to the other party, the agreement had not acquired
contractual force. On the other hand, where a ship was sold “subject
to satisfactory completion of two trial voyages” it was said that such a
stipulation was to be construed as “subject to bona fides”.⁸⁹⁹ The
distinction between the two lines of cases turns, ultimately, on the
construction of the agreement. Even if this requires the discretion to
be exercised in good faith, it does not follow that it must be exercised
reasonably; the matter may be left to the relevant party’s “subjective

6 Chitty on Contracts, 33rd Ed., Sweet and Maxwell, Volume 1, Pg. 305-306, para. 2-164.
23
decision”.⁹⁰⁰ It has also been held that the party on whose satisfaction
the operation of the contract depends must at least provide facilities
for, or not impede, the inspection referred to in the agreement.⁹⁰¹ Of
course if the result of the inspection is unsatisfactory, the principal
obligation of the contract will not take effect.⁹⁰² ‖
(Emphasis supplied)
44. Evidently, the CP relating to the NA Conversion Condition has not
been fulfilled to the purchaser/petitioner‘s satisfaction, and resultantly, the
other obligations under the contract did not come into effect, and the said
Agreement automatically terminated. Effect must be given to the word
―automatic‖ as it appears in Clause 5.6. If contingencies and carve-outs were
to be read between the stage of a CP(s) not being fulfilled on CLSD, and
that of termination of the said Agreement, the word ―automatic‖ would lose
its meaning. It would be unwise to re-write the terms of the contract, or to
read into it an implied term, where a CP‘s non-fulfilment, owing to the fault
of the other party, would act as an exception to the automatic termination
under Clause 5.6. The court, especially while dealing with matters based on
written contracts, must adopt a hands-off approach from such creative
indulgence which could frustrate the contractual wisdom of the parties.
45. The argument of the respondent not complying with Clause 5.3 may
also be considered at this stage, the said clause reads as under:
―5.3 The Seller and/or the Purchaser (as the case maybe) shall, upon
becoming aware of anything which shall or may prevent any of its
respective Conditions Precedent from being satisfied, shall forthwith
notify the other Party in writing as soon as practicable. The other
Party may, in its sole discretion (acting reasonably) and to the extent
permitted under Applicable Law, waive any or all such Conditions
Precedent in whole or in part, or defer the completion of such
Conditions Precedent by a later date as a Conditions Subsequent,
subject to any indemnification obligation in relation to breach or noncompletion of any such Conditions Precedent as deemed necessary by
24
such other Party.‖
It is contended that the respondents‘ did not inform the petitioner of the
circumstances which would or could have prevented the fulfilment of the
CP, which is a breach of Clause 5.3. Further, under Clause 5.7.1, if the
respondents were unable to satisfy the NA Conversion Condition, they were
to notify, not earlier than 28.02.2025, the petitioner of the same.
46. The respondents‘ case is not that they were prevented by anything, or
they could not, owing to their own disability, obtain the permissions
required to satisfy the NA Conversion Condition. Rather, it is that despite
their efforts, the said permissions could not be obtained. Assuming,
however, that there was in fact a breach of the said Clauses, the consequence
does not appear to be Clause 5.6 becoming infructuous or non-applicable.
Rather, it is the ability of the petitioner to treat the CP as a CS which gets
compromised owing to the conscious drafting of the parties.
47. Clause 5.6, it must be stressed, is without any qualification, caveat, or
proviso. It is, read with Clause 15, a mechanism through which the said
Agreement, would automatically terminate. To use Mr. Mehta‘s words, the
said clause is a self-collapsing mechanism agreed to by the parties to the
contract. Therefore, even assuming there has been a breach of Clauses 5.3
and 5.7.1 of the said Agreement, the same would not prevent the application
of Clause 5.6, as first there is no contractual stipulation which makes Clause
5.6 subject to a compliance with Clauses 5.3 and 5.7.1, and second, the said
Agreement when read as a whole, evinces the primacy of Clause 5.6.
25
48. Having said so, it does not imply that the petitioner is remediless. The
petitioner could have, certainly, sought enforcement of its rights, upon there
being a breach of Clauses 5.3 and 5.7.1, but the said action ought to have
been initiated before Clause 5.6 was triggered. For the purposes of Clause
5.7.1, in light of the findings that the CLSD was extended only till
31.05.2025, there were effectively, three long months with the petitioner to
approach a court of law, and pray for appropriate reliefs. Admittedly, the
same was not done. The petitioner waited for the CLSD to arrive, the
automatic termination to happen, and then ask this Court to resurrect a dead
contract from its ashes. The same reasoning applies to an argument of the
respondents‘ breaching their general obligations, under Clauses 5.4 and 17.9
of the said Agreement, to act in good faith towards each other, to comply
with obligations, including fulfilments of CPs, and refrain from acts which
could damage the lawful rights and interests of the parties, under the said
Agreement.
49. From the discussion above, it can be safely concluded that owing to
the NA Conversion Condition CP not being satisfied to the petitioner‘s
satisfaction, the said Agreement automatically terminated on the CLSD i.e.,
31.05.2025. Before analysing the effect of this conclusion on the reliefs
sought in the instant petition, it would also be apposite to analyse whether,
assuming Clause 5.6 of the said Agreement did not apply, and there was in
fact a breach/fault on the part of the respondents‘, specific performance
could be granted in such a scenario or not.
C. SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE OF THE SAID AGREEMENT
26
50. Specific performance entails a claimant insisting upon, and the Court
in turn directing, the defendant to perform a contract in accordance with its
terms.7
In the instant case a decree for specific performance of the said
Agreement would naturally, owing to the conclusion reached above that the
NA Conversion Condition did not become a CS, require the said CP to be
satisfied. The respondents‘ would have to satisfy the said condition and get a
conversion order from the Local Town Panchayat, as also a confirmation
from the Local Town Panchayat that all applicable fines and penalties in
connection with the utilisation of agricultural land for non-agricultural
purposes have been paid.
51. It does not, however, appear that specific performance could ever be
granted for such a condition. Reliance may be placed on the decision of the
Supreme Court in Nandkishore Lalbhai Mehta v. New Era Fabrics Pvt.
Ltd. and Ors.8
, para. 43 of which reads as under:
―43. The submission that the appellant has waived the condition
regarding taking of consent from the labour for the proposed sale and,
therefore, this could not be a ground for cancelling the contract is
misconceived. In the agreement dated 19-10-1977, it was specifically
mentioned that the sale also be subject to your (the defendants) being
able to settle with your labour and your labour agreeing to the sale
contemplated herein and if you are not able to settle with your labour
and to get them to agree to the sale herein contemplated you will not
be bound to complete the sale. The moment labour do not agree to the
sale contemplated, under the terms of the contract, the respondents
were not bound to complete the sale. The maximum period of nine (9)
months does not mean that once the labour had declined to give their
consent for the proposed sale, the contract subsists for a period of
nine (9) months and it cannot be terminated before that period. The
agreement for sale is a contingent agreement depending upon
obtaining permission under Section 22 and Section 27 of the ULC Act,
property being converted from industrial zone to residential use and
settlement with the labour and the labour agreeing to the sale
contemplated therein. If any of the conditions are not fulfilled, the
respondents were not bound to complete the sale and the appellant
was only entitled for return of the money with interest @ 18% p.a.
from the date of refusal of any of the permission or consent or
agreement mentioned above. As in the present case we find that the
Mill Mazdoor Sabha has not given its consent to the proposed sale,
agreement for sale could not have been performed and had ceased.
The appellant is only entitled to refund of the amount along with
interest @ 18% p.a. stipulated therein.‖
Further, in Chitty on Contracts9
under the heading ―Conditional contracts‖,
the following position of law has been taken note of:
―Conditional contracts
On a principle similar to that stated in para. 27-058 above, an
obligation which, under the contract alleged to give rise to it, is
subject to a condition precedent not within the control of the party
seeking the remedy will not be specifically enforced before the
condition has occurred; here too the making of the order could turn
out to be nugatory if the condition were not satisfied. The occurrence
of the condition removes this obstacle to specific performance.‖
(Emphasis supplied)
52. Granting specific performance of such a contract, and particularly the
NA Conversion Condition, also, effectively amount to compelling the
government authorities, who are not privy to the said Agreement, to grant
the change of land use permission. It is but obvious that such a decree
cannot be granted by a Court. Reliance may be placed on para. 25 of
Puravankara Projects Ltd. v. Hotel Venus International and Ors.10 which
reads as under:
―25. Government by a contract cannot be compelled to grant
permission. The statutory parameters have to be kept in view. A
condition may be there, as appears to be in present case, to take steps
to obtain permission. An agreement may fail because of absence of
permission. Then it becomes unenforceable.‖
53. Cumulatively, since the petitioner has not been able to overcome the
application of Clause 5.6 of the said Agreement, and the contract between
the parties as on date stands terminated, specific performance for it cannot
be granted. The reason being that there is no breach, as such of the contract,
which would inhere in the petitioner the right to insist upon the performance
of the contract. The automatic termination clause being paramount, shall be
enforced, and the contract would meet a peaceful death.
54. Even otherwise, assuming Clause 5.6 was not attracted, the Court
cannot lose sight of the fact that the satisfaction of NA Conversion
Condition was dependent upon the government authorities granting an
approval, which is beyond the control of the respondents‘, and it is trite that
specific performance for such a contract, cannot be granted.
55. Reverting to the authorities cited by Mr. Rao, the decisions in K.S.
Manjunath v. Moorasavirappa,
11 Narendra Hirawat and Co. v. Sholay
Media Entertainment Pvt. Ltd.,
12 Narendra Hirawat & Co. v. Sholay
Media Entertainment (P) Ltd.,
13 and A. Murugan v. Rainbow Foundation
Ltd.14 pertain to the determinability of the contract. The said issue did not
really arise in the present case. The findings relating to the said Agreement
not being capable of specific performance is not because of there being an
inherent flaw in the contract,15 or it being in the nature of a determinable
contract, but rather because the terms of the contract, particularly Clause 5.6,
are such that the very enforcement of the terms of the said Agreement would
prevent, post its automatic termination, the re-birth of the contract. The
contract has come to an end on its own strength in the manner contemplated
therein, and not due to any factor attributable to either side.
56. The discussion in Annamalai v. Vasanthi16 at para. 33, was in the
context of whether the plaintiff therein was required to seek a declaratory
relief, and the same has no bearing to the facts of the instant case. Similarly,
DLF Home Developers Limited v. Shipra Estate Limited17 involved a
clause fundamentally different from those in the said Agreement. The
decision of Global Music Junction (P) Ltd. v. Shatrughan Kumar18 was
also delivered in the context of the plaintiff therein approaching the Court
during the subsistence of the agreement.
57. The decision of the Bombay High Court in Sekura Roads Ltd. v.
IL&FS Transportation Networks Ltd.,
19 is also distinguishable on facts. In
para. 14 of the judgement, it narrates that there was no provision for an
automatic termination in the agreement in issue; and the observations made
by the learned judge at para. 29 are to be appreciated in that very context.
58. Lastly, while the principle in Upma Khanna v. Tarun Sawhney,
20
that no person can be allowed to take benefit of their own wrong is not
doubted, the same does not really apply to the instant case. In Upma
Khanna (supra), the agreement to sell therein required the sellers to convert
the land, subject matter of the agreement, from leasehold to freehold under
L&DO. In para 7, the said judgement records that L&DO would not have
executed the conveyance deed unless the demand outstanding in its records
was cleared. This was, unequivocally, not been done by the sellers. It, thus,
allowed the Court, to conclusively arrive at the finding of fault qua the
sellers. In the instance case, as is noted in paras 40-42 of this judgement,
such a view at this stage cannot be taken.
59. Further, even if fault is attributed on the part of the respondents, the
consequence of the fault appears to be provided for in the agreement itself.
Specific performance to enforce the said Agreement, in any case, will not
lie. In light of the discussion above, it is clear that out of the triple test which
a claimant needs to satisfy for an interim injunction, it being a prima facie
case in its favour, balance of convenience, and irreparable injury, the
petitioner has faltered on the very first step. There is no prima facie case
made out for the grant of an interim injunction.
60. However, since the present dispute would be the subject matter of
arbitration to be conducted before the arbitral tribunal. It would be
appropriate to secure the interest of the petitioner insofar as its investment in
securing a credit line is concerned. The petitioner, if in case it succeeds

20 2012 SCC OnLine Del 2716
31
before the tribunal, depending upon the satisfaction of the learned
arbitrators, may be awarded either a decree for specific performance or
damages, but in either case, it becomes important to secure the monies spent
by it in maintaining the credit line to close the SPAs. The amount so spent as
interest payments in maintaining the credit line is, as per the petition,
€208,532/- which is equivalent to INR 2,20,85,783.52/-. The respondents
are, therefore, directed to deposit a lump sum amount of INR 3,00,00,000/-,
or furnish a bank guarantee of an equivalent amount with the arbitral
tribunal, so constituted, within a period of 15 days from today.
61. In light of the submission made by Mr. Mehta in O.M.P. (I) (Comm.)
489/2025, that the fate of their petition is contingent on the outcome of
O.M.P. (I) (Comm.) 464/2025, and that their petition would be infructuous if
the latter petition is dismissed, O.M.P. (I) (Comm.) 489/2025 also, deserves
to be, dismissed.
IV. ORDER
62. Accordingly, the present petition O.M.P. (I) (Comm.) 489/2025 is
disposed of. O.M.P. (I) (Comm.) 464/2025 is hereby dismissed as having
been rendered infructuous. Pending applications, if any, in the said petitions,
also stand disposed of. 