COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: FAO (COMM) 210/2025 & connected matters (FAO (COMM) 204/2025, 211/2025, 237/2025, 238/2025, 239/2025)
DATE: 24th December, 2025
PLAINTIFF: Rahul Bhargava & Anr.; Harmeet Singh Kapoor & Anr.; M/s Jagmohan Enterprises LLP
DEFENDENT: M/s Neo Developers Pvt. Ltd.
JUDGE: Hon'ble Ms. Justice Prathiba M. Singh & Hon'ble Mr. Justice Shail Jain

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2. Present Appeals have been filed by six Appellants under Section 13
(1A) of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015, read with Section 37(1)(b) of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act of 1996 (herein after referred to as
the Act of 1996), inter-alia,, challenging the Final Orders passed by the
District Judge (Commercial Court), Central Delhi, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi,
by which the Petitions filed under Section 9 of the Act of 1996, were
dismissed by the concerned Commercial Courts.
3. FAO (COMM) NO. 210/2025, titled “Rahul Bhargava &Anr. vs.
Neo Developers Pvt. Ltd.”, has been treated as the lead matter in the present
bunch of Appeals.
BRIEF FACTS:
4. The brief background of cases leading to these Appeals is as follows-
A. In the year 2015, the Appellants entered into a commercial
transaction with the Respondent, Neo Developers Pvt. Ltd., for the
purchase of commercial units in a project titled "Neo Square",
situated at Sector 109, Dwarka Expressway, Gurugram,
Haryana.
B. Pursuant thereto, the Appellants executed a Builder Buyer
Agreement ("BBA") and a Memorandum of Understanding ("MoU")
with the Respondent in respect of Unit No. 21, Third Floor,
admeasuring 250 sq. ft., at the rate of Rs. 4,500/- (Rupees Forty Five
Hundred) per sq. ft. for a total consideration of Rs.11,66,715/-
(Rupees Eleven Lakh Sixty-Six Thousand Seven Hundred Fifteen
(CHART 1)
BELOW IS A FACTUAL CHART OF ALL APPEALS
APPEAL
NO.
NAME OF
THE
APPELLANT
PRIORITY
UNIT NO.
AMOUNT OF
SALE
CONSIDERATION
ASSURED
RETURNS
FIXED
PER
MONTH
UNSPECIFIED
DEMANDS
AND FIT-OUT
CHARGES
FAO
(COMM)
204/2025
Harmeet Singh
Kapoor
&
Satvinder
Kapoor
58C
(Commercial
Shop, Ground
Floor,
measuring
275 sq. ft. at
Rs. 8,250/-
per sq. ft. )
Rs. 23,70,844/- Rs. 35,035/- Rs. 6,75,679/-
Rs. 11,35,750/-
FAO
(COMM)
210/2025
Rahul
Bhargava
&
Ragini Bhargava
21
(Restaurant,
Third Floor,
measuring
250 sq. ft. at
Rs. 4,500/-
per sq. ft)
Rs. 11,66,715/- Rs. 22,500/- Rs. 5,13,941/-
Rs. 10,32,500/-
FAO
(COMM.)
211/2025
Rahul
Bhargava
&
Ragini Bhargava
23
(Restaurant,
Third Floor,
measuring
250 sq. ft. at
Rs. 4,500/-
per sq. ft)
Rs. 11,66,715/- Rs. 22,500/- Rs. 5,14,474/-
Rs. 10,32,500/-
FAO
(COMM.)
237/2025
Harmeet Singh
Kapoor
&
Satvinder
Kapoor
58A
(Commercial
Shop, Ground
Floor,
measuring
505 sq. ft. at
Rs. 8,250/-
per sq. ft.)
Rs. 43,53,732/- Rs. 64,337/- Rs. 12,35,362/-
Rs. 20,85,650/-
FAO
(COMM.)
238/2025
Jagmohan
Enterprises LLP
22
(Commercial
Shop, Ground
Floor,
measuring
583 sq. ft. at
Rs. 4,100/-
per sq. ft.)
Rs. 24,76,460/- Rs. 49,555/- Rs. 4,57,748/-
FAO
(COMM.)
239/2025
Rahul
Bhargava
&
Ragini Bhargava
25
(Restaurant,
Third Floor,
measuring
250 sq. ft. at
Rs. 4,500/-
per sq. ft)
Rs. 11,66,715/- Rs. 22,500/- Rs. 5,14,393/-
Rs. 10,32,500/-
C. The entire sale consideration was duly paid by all the Appellants at
the time of execution of the said agreements.
D. As per the terms of the MoU, the Respondent assured the Appellants
of Assured Monthly Returns amounting to Rs. 22,500/- (Rupees
Twenty-Two Thousand Five Hundred Only). The Respondent was
contractually bound to disburse the said assured returns, beginning
from the date of execution of the MoU and BBA, i.e., 31.01.2015,
until the commencement of the first lease in respect of the said unit.
The obligation to pay assured returns was unconditional and
unequivocal under the MoU.
E. However, beginning from the year 2019, disputes arose between the
parties, inter alia, on account of the following acts and omissions on
the part of the Respondent –
a. The unilateral cessation of payment of assured monthly returns
with effect from July 2019;
b. Issuance of a Final Notice dated 07.06.2021 by the Respondent,
raising vague, unexplained dues, coupled with an intimation of
cancellation of allotment in the event of non-payment of the
c. Unjustified delay in construction, and failure to hand over
possession of the allotted commercial units within the stipulated
time.
F. Aggrieved thereby, all the Appellants approached the Economic
Offences Wing, Delhi Police, which culminated in the registration of
a common F.I.R. No. 46/2022 under Sections 406, 420, and 120B
of IPC dated March 16, 2022, against the Respondent. In addition,
all the Appellants instituted proceedings before the Haryana Real
Estate Regulatory Authority (hereinafter, ‘HARERA’), by filing
various Complaints, including one titled "Rahul Bhargava and
Ragni Bhargava vs. Neo Developers Pvt. Ltd.” dated 24.03.2023.
Other Appellants also filed similar proceedings in their respective
matters.
G. The Complaints of the Appellants in FAO (COMM.) 210/2025, FAO
(COMM.) 211/2025, FAO (COMM.) 238/2025, FAO (COMM.)
239/2025, and in FAO (COMM.) 204/2025, FAO (COMM.)
237/2025 were adjudicated by HARERA vide Orders dated
14.08.2024 and 14.05.2025, respectively.
● Vide Order dated 14.08.2024, HARERA was pleased to grant
reliefs in favour of the Appellants, mainly in Petitions filed by
Appellants bearing FAO (COMM) 210/2025, FAO (COMM)
211/2025, FAO (COMM) 238/2025, and FAO (COMM)
239/2025. The said order reads as under-
“H. Directions of the authority
41. Hence, the Authority hereby passes this order and
issues the following directions under section 37 of the
promoter as per the function entrusted to the authority
under section 34(f):
i. The cancellation dated 07.06.2021 is hereby set aside
and the respondent is directed to pay the arrears of
amount of assured return at the rate i.e., Rs.22,500/- per
month from the date i.e., 31.01.2015 till the
commencement of the first lease on the said unit as per
the memorandum of understanding, after deducting the
amount already paid by the respondent on account of
assured return to the complainants.
ii. The respondent is directed to pay arrears of accrued
assured return as per MOU dated 31.01.2015 till date at
the agreed rate within 90 days from the date of this
order after adjustment of outstanding dues, if any, from
the complainants and failing which that amount would
be payable with interest @9% p.a. till the date of actual
realization.
iii. The respondent is directed to offer possession of the
unit within 2 months from the date of obtaining
occupation certificate from the concerned authorities.
iv. The respondent is directed to execute conveyance
deed in favour of the complainants within 3 months after
obtaining the occupation certificate.
v. The respondent shall not charge anything from the
complainants which is not the part of the agreement of
sale.”
● Vide Order dated 14.05.2025, HARERA was pleased to grant reliefs
in favour of other Appellants in FAO(COMM.) 204/2025, FAO
(COMM.) 237/2025. The said order reads as follows:
“H. Directions of the authority
50. Hence, the authority hereby passes this order and issue
the following directions under section 37 of the Act to
ensure compliance of obligations cast upon the promoter as
per the function entrusted to the authority under section
3(f)
i. The demand letter dated 22.01.2020 as well as final notice
dated 07.06.2021 is hereby set aside.
ii. The respondent is directed to pay assured return to the
complainants at the agreed rate per month from the date,
i.e., 01.11.2018 till notice of possession is issued to the
complainants as per the memorandum of understanding
dated 01.11.2016, after deducting the amount already paid
on account of assured return to the complainants.
iii. The respondent is directed to pay the outstanding
accrued assured return amount till date at the agreed rate
within 90 days from the date of this order after adjustment
of outstanding dues, if any, from the complainants and
failing which that amount would be payable with interest @
9.10% pa. till the date of actual realization.
iv. The respondent is directed to handover possession of the
unit to the complainants in terms of the MoU as well as
buyer's agreement executed between them, on payment of
outstanding dues if any, within 60 days. The respondent is
further directed to get the conveyance deed of the allotted
unit executed in their favour in terms of Section 17(1) of the
Act of 2016 on payment of stamp duty and registration
charges as applicable within three months from the date of
this order.
v. The respondent shall not charge anything from the
complainants which is not the part of the BBA/MoU dated
01.11.2016.
vi. A period of 90 days is given to the respondent to comply
with the directions given in this order and failing which
legal consequences would follow.”
H. It is also contended by the Appellants herein that no Appeal has
been filed by the Respondent against the Final Orders of HARERA
dated 14.08.2024 and 14.05.2025.
I. Subsequent to the passing of the said Order by HARERA, the
Respondent, vide communications dated 27.02.2025, in FAO
Occupation Certificate (OC) had now been obtained and the
possession was now being offered, subject to the clearance of
outstanding dues and completion of documentation. The Respondent
raised further demands upon the Appellants towards the alleged
dues and certain fit-out charges, pertaining to the respective
commercial unit, amounting to Rs. 5,13,941/- (Rupees Five Lakh
Thirteen Thousand Nine Hundred and Forty One only) and Rs.
10,32,500/- (Rupees Ten Lakh Thirty Two Thousand and Five
Hundred only), respectively, without furnishing any contractual or
factual basis for the same.
Similar unexplained demands and fit-out charges were also raised in
respect of the units allotted to the other Appellants, particulars
whereof are reflected in the Chart 1, set out hereinabove.
J. It is, further, submitted by the Appellants that in the said letter
dated 27.02.2025, the Respondent also communicated to the
Appellants that the units purchased by the Appellants had already
been leased out to the prospective lessor for the second time since the
same could not be finalised due to the Appellants’ failure to sign the
relevant documents. Further, the Respondent stated that if the
payment demanded was not made, the allotment of the units to the
Appellants would stand cancelled.
K. In the meantime, the Appellants in FAO (COMM.) 210/2025
initiated Execution Proceedings in April 2025, for the enforcement
of the Order dated 14.08.2024 before HARERA, registered as
HARERA-GRG-2235-2025, which is stated to be pending. The
being OMP (I) (Comm.) No. 470/2025, titled “Rahul Bhargava &
Anr. v. M/s Neo Developers Pvt. Ltd.”, before the Commercial Court,
Central District, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi.
The said Petition was dismissed vide Order dated 09.06.2025, passed
by the Ld. Commercial Court, wherein the following order has been
passed against the Petitioner:
“This Court does not have territorial jurisdiction to try and
entertain the present Petition, and hence, the present
Petition is disposed of for want of territorial jurisdiction.”
L. Similarly, the corresponding Petitions filed by the other
Appellants were also dismissed vide separate orders, primarily on the
ground that the Appellants, having already availed remedies under the
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (hereinafter,
“RERA Act”), and therefore, were precluded from maintaining the
Petitions under Section 9 of the Act of 1996. The reasoning adopted
in the impugned judgments proceeds on the premise that the
Appellants cannot be permitted to seek identical reliefs before
multiple fora.
M. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid Impugned Orders in Section 9
Petition under the Act of 1996, present Appeals have been preferred
by the Appellants, inter alia, seeking the following reliefs.-
1. Set aside the Impugned Order dated 31.07.2025 passed
under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 in OMP(I)(COMM) No. 470 of 2025, titled “Rahul
Bhargava vs. M/s Neo Developers Pvt. Ltd.”, by the Ld.
District Judge (Commercial), Tis Hazari Courts, New
2. Grant the interim reliefs as prayed for in OMP (I)
(COMM.) No. 470 of 2025 under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
“i. Pass an interim order of injunction in favour of
the Petitioner and against the Respondent, thereby
restraining the Respondent and their agents,
servants, attorneys, heirs, contractors, labourers,
representatives, etc. from leasing out the property or
creating any third-party interests till the
commencement of arbitration, and
ii. Pass an interim order of injunction in favour of
the Petitioner and against the Respondent, thereby
restraining the Respondent from cancelling the
Unit/BBA or MOU till the commencement of the
Arbitration, and
iii. Pass such other and further orders in the
Interest of Justice as this Hon'ble Court deems
necessary in the facts and circumstances of the
present case.”
N. Appeals seeking similar reliefs have been filed by all the
Appellants. The Petitions under Section 9 of the Act of 1996 were
basically dismissed on one ground that, since the Appellant has
already availed of his remedy under the RERA Act, he cannot seek a
simultaneous remedy under the Arbitration & Conciliation Act,1996.
Except in the case of Rahul Bhargava bearing OMP (I) (COMM.)
470/2025, where it was dismissed on the ground that the Commercial
Courts of the Central District have no jurisdiction, as the seat of
Arbitration provided in the MOU is ‘New Delhi’, hence the ‘Delhi’
Court cannot have jurisdiction. Thus, except for FAO (COMM)
can be allowed to avail a simultaneous remedy of Arbitration after
availing the remedy under the RERA Act.
O. All the present Appeals are against the Orders of dismissal of
the Section 9 Petitions by different Ld. District Judges (Commercial
Court) on two major grounds.
The present chart provides the details of different OMPs filed and the
order/ reasoning thereof passed in those OMPs, which led to the filing
of the present Appeals.
(CHART 2)
A CHART OF ALL THE SECTION 9 PETITIONS FILED
APPEAL
NO.
ARISING OUT
OF
IMPUGNED
ORDER DATE
AND PASSED
BY
DECISION AND REASONS
FAO
(COMM)
210/2025
OMP (I) (COMM.)
No. 470/2025, titled
“Rahul Bhargava
&Anr. Vs. M/s Neo
Developers Pvt.Ltd.
”
Order dated
09.06.2025
Passed by Ld.
District Judge,
Commercial Court
-01, Central
District, THC,
Delhi
The Petition was dismissed by the Ld.
Commercial Court on the ground that the Court
did not have the territorial jurisdiction to try and
entertain the Petition, by technically
differentiating between ‘Delhi' and ‘New Delhi’
as the seat of Arbitration.
FAO
(COMM)
204/2025
OMP (I) (COMM.)
No. 485/2025, titled
“Harmeet Singh
Kapoor &Anr. Vs.
M/s Neo Developers
Pvt. Ltd.”
Order dated
10.07.2025
Passed by Ld.
District Judge,
Commercial-11
Central District,
THC, Delhi
The Petition was dismissed by the Ld.
Commercial Court on the ground that the reliefs
sought by the Appellant/Petitioner in the
Section 9 Petition were already sought before
HARERA, and the grievances of the
Appellant/Petitioner were duly heard and
adjudicated vide Order dated 14.05.2025 of
HARERA.
FAO
(COMM.)
211/2025
OMP (I) (COMM.)
No. 486/2025,
titled
“Rahul Bhargav
&Anr. Vs. M/s Neo
Developers Pvt.
Order dated
10.07.2025
Passed by Ld.
District Judge,
Commercial-11,
The Petition was dismissed by the Ld.
Commercial Court on the ground that the reliefs
sought by the Appellant/Petitioner in the
Section 9 Petition were already sought before
HARERA, and the grievances of the
Ltd.” Central District,
THC, Delhi
adjudicated vide Order dated 14.08.2024 of
HARERA.
FAO
(COMM.)
237/2025
OMP (I) (COMM.)
No. 487/2025, titled
“Harmeet Singh
Kapoor &Anr Vs.
M/s Neo Developers
Pvt. Ltd.”
Order dated
31.07.2025.
Passed by Ld.
District Judge,
Commercial Court
-04, Central
District, THC,
Delhi
The Petition was dismissed by the Ld.
Commercial Court on the ground that the
Appellants/Petitioners already availed their
remedy before Haryana RERA, seeking similar
relief and their grievances were heard and
adjudicated vide order dated 14.05.2025.
Herein, the Ld. Judge applied the Doctrine of
Election.
FAO
(COMM.)
238/2025
OMP (I) (COMM.)
No. 489/2025, titled
“M/s Jagmohan
Enterprises LLP Vs.
M/s Neo Developers
Pvt. Ltd.”
Order dated
31.07.2025.
Passed by Ld.
District Judge,
Commercial
Court-04, Central
District, THC,
Delhi
The Petition was dismissed by the Ld.
Commercial Court on the ground that the
Appellants/Petitioners already availed their
remedy before Haryana RERA, seeking similar
relief and their grievances were heard and
adjudicated vide order dated 14.05.2025.
Herein, the Ld. Judge applied the Doctrine of
Election.
FAO
(COMM.)
239/2025
OMP (I) (COMM)
No. 488/2025, titled
“Rahul Bhargav
&Anr. Vs. M/s Neo
Developers Pvt.
Ltd.”
Order dated
31.07.2025.
Passed by Ld.
District Judge
Commercial Court
-04, Central
District, THC,
Delhi
The Petition was dismissed by the Ld.
Commercial Court on the ground that the
Appellants/Petitioners already availed their
remedy before Haryana RERA, seeking similar
relief and their grievances were heard and
adjudicated vide order dated 14.05.2025.
Herein, the Ld. Judge applied the Doctrine of
Election.
5. Thus, for these impugned orders, it is clear that the OMP (I)
(COMM.) 485 /2025 and OMP (I) (COMM.) 486/2025 were dismissed on
the ground that the relief sought in RERA and Section 9 are the same.
Though perusal of the Impugned Orders shows that the orders lack proper
consideration of the relief sought in the two Petitions and the effect thereof.
6. Also, the Impugned Order in OMP (I) (COMM.) 470/2025 appears
to be on a hyper-technical ground. If the Court was of the opinion that it did
consideration by the appropriate Court under Order 7 Rule 10 of the Code of
Civil Procedure,1908, and therefore, the dismissal of the Petition on this
ground is not valid.
7. The other three OMPs, particularly OMP (I) (COMM.) 487/2025,
OMP (I) (COMM.) 488/2025, & OMP (I) (COMM.) 489/2025, have been
dismissed by a detailed order on the ground that since the Petitioners have
chosen their remedies under the RERA Act, they cannot seek relief under
Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, 1996. The Court, in these Petitions,
discussed the Doctrine of Election of Remedy.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL:
8. Present Appeals have been preferred by the Appellants on the following
grounds in respect to the reliefs claimed by them -
a. The cause of action for invoking jurisdiction under Section
9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, is distinct
from the proceedings before HARERA.
b. The coercive threat to lease out the Appellants’ unit unless
baseless fit-out and other charges were paid was never the
subject matter before HARERA.
c. The remedies under the RERA Act and the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act are concurrent, as Section 88 of the RERA
Act expressly provides that its provisions are in addition to, and
not in derogation of, any other law.
d. Denial of interim protection defeats the object of Section 9,
Court being required only to assess a prima facie case, balance
of convenience, and irreparable injury.
e. The Impugned Order is non-speaking and devoid of reasons,
as the learned District Judge (Commercial) failed to disclose
the basis for concluding that it lacked territorial jurisdiction
under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
9. The issues before this Court in all six Appeals are more or less
similar, i.e., whether the Commercial Courts had the jurisdiction to decide
Section 9 Petition under the Act of 1996, or in other words, whether the
Section 9 Petition was maintainable in the light of the orders passed by
HARERA.
10. During the course of proceedings of these Appeals, both parties
vehemently argued about the terms of the Banning of Unregulated Deposit
Schemes Act, 2019 (BUDS Act), the MoU, the existence of the units, the
creation of third-party interest by the Respondent, and other rights &
liabilities of the Parties.
11. Subsequent to oral submissions, parties were directed to file short
affidavits giving the exact facts. Further, a Local Commissioner (LC) was
appointed vide Order dated 18.09.2025, to present a Report regarding the
present status of units in question. The LC submitted its Report dated
05.10.2025, stating that:
a. The construction/labour work is being carried out in relation to the
iron partition. The work is raw as of now and is in its initial stages.
b. The fourth floor was pitch dark without any source of
Additionally, the lift portion on the fourth floor is also incomplete
as of now.
c. On Respondent being requested to provide the copies of the leases
and sub–leases (if any) executed with respect to the premises in
question, the Respondent provided only a copy of the Lease Deed
executed between M/s Neo Developers Pvt. Ltd. and M/s Vexto
Commercials Pvt. Ltd.
12. Since, before this Court, in the present Appeals, only the short point
of maintainability of the Section 9 Petition is concerned, considering the
orders of RERA and also, when the Appellants are seeking interim relief of
protection before initiating the Arbitration, this Court is not to consider the
rights & liabilities of parties under the MoU, as it is the subject-matter of
Arbitration.
ISSUES INVOLVED :
13. The Questions before this Court at present are the following:
a. Whether the reliefs sought by the Appellants under Section 9 of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, were distinct from,
and not a duplication of, the reliefs granted or adjudicated upon
by HARERA?
b. Whether the Commercial Court failed to appreciate the limited
and protective nature of jurisdiction exercised under Section 9 of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, which is intended to
preserve the subject-matter of arbitration and secure the ends of
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF PARTIES :
14. As for the submissions of the parties, Mr Tanmay Mehta, ld. Counsel
for the Appellants vehemently urged that vide order dated 14th August,
2025, whereby HARERA has directed the Respondents herein to offer
possession to the Appellants and also has held that the demand against
Appellants for fit-out has no basis. The present Lease, dated 30.06.2025, is
a complete sham, as it is a company with which the promoters of the
Respondent are intrinsically linked. The incorporation of the said company
was itself on 06.05.2025. Further, the Local Commissioner’s (LC) Report
dated 05.10.2025 is referred to by the ld. Counsel for the Appellants to
demonstrate that the character of the floor has also been changed from a
double-heighted restaurant, which is recognised in the sanctioned plan by
splitting the floor and inserting beams in the floor to create a floor of
different measures.
15. Further, the submissions of Mr Mehta are that the LC’s Report and
the photographs therein show, without any doubt, that there is no tenant
presently in the property. It is also submitted by the Appellants that the Mall
is yet to be finished for occupation. The ld. Counsel for the Appellants
further submits that, except for one small shop on the ground floor, no tenant
is occupying the entire premises, which is about 17 floors.
16. Mr. Chaudhary, ld. Counsel for the Respondent, on the other hand,
has made detailed submissions as under:-
a. Since the Appellants’ allotment of the units is only on the third floor,
no submissions can be made in respect of the fourth floor. He has
double-heighted. There are only a few areas which are areas of double
height. According to him, no area of the third floor is double-
heighted. The allottees in these floors do not have any identified space
which is to be given to them. In fact, the rent has to be negotiated by
the Company as a whole, and the only entitlement of the allottees is
for the assured returns and nothing more. He further submits that six
allottees who are before this Court have an allotment of only 1500 sq.
feet, whereas the total super area of the third floor is 46036.63 sq.
feet. The Appellants form a very small minority, according to Mr.
Chaudhary.
b. Furthermore, it is submitted that the allottees are bound by the BBA
as well as the MOU. The MOU is different in all the cases, and the
allottees do not take any escalation benefit. It is merely in the form of
an investment, which is recognised as per the BBA and MOU. The
RERA which was only dealing with the BBA and not MoU, but the
MOU is sought to be enforced before the Commercial Court. Once
the remedy of RERA was availed of by the Appellants and the order
was passed by RERA, the Petition under Section 9 of the Act of 1996
cannot be filed.
c. The submission is that once the RERA has passed the order, the
Commercial Court under Section 9 Petition cannot be approached to
enforce and execute the RERA’s order for which the execution is
already pending before RERA. It is further submitted that the amounts
paid by the Respondent up to June 2019 clearly demonstrate that the
total assured returns paid to each of the parties exceed the amounts
concerned, the assured returns paid exceed the amount received;
however, in the case of the remaining two allottees, the returns paid
may be less. Nevertheless, for the purpose of amicably resolving the
dispute, the Company is willing to pay the assured returns to them as
well. This is without prejudice to the submissions on behalf of the
respondent.
d. Mr. Chaudhary, ld. Counsel for the Respondent also highlighted that
the dispute arose only in respect of fit-out amounts, which were
demanded in 2019, and recently, the RERA in respect of the same
Mall has recognised that the Respondent can demand fit-out amounts.
The clauses in the MOU are broad enough to permit the Respondent
to negotiate the terms of the lease, and that would include demanding
of the fit-out amounts from the allottees. Finally, it is submitted that
Clause 9 (b) also makes it clear that any condition and agreement
which are agreed to by the Respondent with the tenants would also be
binding on the allottees. Mr. Chaudhary highlights Section 9 Petition,
which is only in the nature of the injunction and nothing more.
17. Further, Clauses 9 (a), 10 (i), (ii) and 13 are referred to and relied
upon to argue that the MOU overrides the BBA. In addition, the
consequences of not leasing within two years period have also been
provided in the MoU. If those conditions are satisfied, then the possession
can be granted. Further, the submission was made that in these cases, it is a
normal practice not to give allottees any specific identified space; only a
proportionate right is given, and the possession is symbolic.
18. In the rejoinder, Mr. Mehta, ld. Counsel for the Petitioner submits that
charges, would have no application in the present case as in the said case
there was a clause, namely Clause 8 (d) which was a specific clause to the
MOUs which were the subject matter of the RERA order dated 16.09.2025,
and such a clause does not exist in the present agreements and there is a
difference in the terms. The demand for fit-out is completely arbitrary. The
RERA has already directed the Respondent to hand over the possession of
the unit along with assured returns. The order of RERA has not been
challenged finally. The lease deed, which has been entered into with M/s
Vexto Commercials Pvt. Ltd for a period of 9 years, is also an unregistered
lease, and it is not enforceable in law.
DISCUSSION :
A. First Issue pertains to relief sought before RERA and Section 9.
19. At the outset, it is stated here that the complaints instituted by the
Appellants before the Haryana Real Estate Regulatory Authority were in
exercise of their statutory rights under the Real Estate (Regulation and
Development) Act, 2016. The reliefs sought therein included the following:
“1. A direction to the Respondent to comply with its contractual
and statutory obligations, including completion of construction and
handing over possession of the allotted commercial units in
accordance with the agreed timelines, including appropriate
directions, compensation, and/or interest as contemplated under the
RERA Act, along with the execution of the sale deed;
2. A direction for payment of assured monthly returns as
stipulated under the Memorandum of Understanding, along with
Relief against the Respondent creating any third-party rights until the
completion of the project and handing over of the possession to the
Appellants;
3. A declaration that the demands raised by the Respondent were
illegal, arbitrary, and contrary to the Builder Buyer Agreement and
MoU, insofar as they were unexplained or not contractually
payable.”
20. In addition, the reliefs therein pertained mainly to substantive
adjudication of rights, including issues of delay in construction, non-
payment of assured returns, and other violations falling squarely within the
regulatory jurisdiction of the Authority. HARERA, while exercising its
statutory mandate, rendered determinations which are final in character,
subject, of course, to remedies available under the RERA Act.
21. In contradistinction, the Petitions filed before the Commercial Court
under Section 9 of the Act of 1996 were limited to seeking interim and
protective measures, pending initiation and commencement of arbitral
proceedings, and therefore, were instituted in a materially different
context. The reliefs sought were not adjudicatory and included:
“A. Pass an interim order of injunction in favour of the
Petitioner and against the Respondent, thereby restraining the
Respondent and their agents, servants, attorneys, heirs,
contractors, labourers, representatives, etc. from leasing out
the property or creating third-party interest till the
commencement of arbitration; and
B. Pass an interim order of injunction in favour of the
Petitioner and against the Respondent, thereby restraining the
Respondent from cancelling the Unit/BBA or MoU till the
C. Pass such other and further orders in the Interest of
Justice as this Hon'ble Court deems necessary in the facts and
circumstances of the present case.”
22. The Appellants did not seek adjudication of disputes on the merits,
nor did they invite the Commercial Court to sit in Appeal over the orders
passed by HARERA. The jurisdiction invoked under Section 9 was purely
interim and protective, intended to secure the subject-matter of the
arbitration and to prevent the Respondent from taking steps which could
irreversibly prejudice the Appellants’ rights pending arbitral adjudication.
23. A principal error that disseminates the impugned orders is the
assumption that the Appellants, by approaching different fora, sought the
same reliefs arising out of the same cause of action, thereby engaging in
impermissible parallel proceedings. A closer scrutiny of the pleadings and
the nature of reliefs sought, however, reveals that the proceedings before
HARERA and those under Section 9 of the Act of 1996 occupy distinct legal
terrains and were invoked for different and well-defined purposes.
24. The Court would like to mention that a perusal of the complaint filed
before HARERA shows that the relief sought was in respect of payment of
assured returns and for restraining the Respondent from entering into any
lease deed with the third party till the completion of the project and
handing over of possession to the Appellants. On the other hand, the
prayer in the Petitions under Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996, is for restraining the Respondents from leasing out the property
to any third party after the occupation certificate is issued and also for
restraining the cancellation of the unit till the commencement of
25. In the present case, reliance has been placed upon the Judgment of the
Supreme Court in ‘IREO Grace Realtech (P) Ltd. v. Abhishek Khanna,
(2021) 3 SCC 241’, wherein the Scope of alternative remedies available to
the Petitioner was discussed. The relevant extract from the Judgement reads
as follows :
“..
[..............]
37. We will now consider the provisions of the RERA Act,
which was brought into force on 1-5-2016. The Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the RERA Act, 2016, reads as
follows:
“The Statement of Objects and Reasons.—The real estate
sector plays a catalytic role in fulfilling the need and
demand for housing and infrastructure in the country. While
this sector has grown significantly in recent years, it has
been largely unregulated, with the absence of
professionalism and standardisation, and lack of adequate
consumer protection. Though the Consumer Protection Act,
1986 is available as a forum to the buyers in the real estate
market, the recourse is only curative and is not adequate to
address all the concerns of buyers and promoters in that
sector. The lack of standardisation has been a constraint to
the healthy and orderly growth of industry. Therefore, the
need for regulating the sector has been emphasised in
various forums. In view of the above, it becomes necessary
to have a Central legislation, namely, the Real Estate
(Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013 in the interests of
effective consumer protection, uniformity and
standardisation of business practices and the transactions
in the real estate sector. The proposed Bill provides for the
establishment of the Real Estate Regulatory Authority (the
Authority) for regulation and promotion of real estate sector
and to ensure sale of plot, apartment or building, as the
case may be, in an efficient and transparent manner and to
protect the interest of consumers in real estate sector and
from the decisions, directions or orders of the Authority.”
(emphasis supplied)
37.3. Section 79 of the RERA Act bars the jurisdiction only
of civil Courts in respect of matters which an authority
constituted under the RERA Act is empowered to adjudicate
on. Section 79 reads as:
“79. Bar of jurisdiction.—No civil Court shall have
jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which the Authority or the
adjudicating officer or the Appellate Tribunal is
empowered by or under this Act to determine and no
injunction shall be granted by any Court or other
authority in respect of any action taken or to be
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or
under this Act.
37.5. An allottee may elect or opt for one out of the
remedies provided by law for redressal of its injury or
grievance. An election of remedies arises when two
concurrent remedies are available, and the aggrieved party
chooses to exercise one, in which event he loses the right to
simultaneously exercise the other for the same cause of
action.
38. The doctrine of election was discussed in A.P. State
Financial Corpn. v. Gar Re-Rolling Mills [A.P. State
Financial Corpn. v. Gar Re-Rolling Mills, (1994) 2 SCC
647], in the following words : (SCC pp. 660-61, paras 15-
16)
15. The doctrine of election clearly suggests that
when two remedies are available for the same
relief, the party to whom the said remedies are
available has the option to elect either of them but
that doctrine would not apply to cases where the
different. To hold otherwise may lead to injustice
and inconsistent results. ... Since, the Corporation
must be held entitled and given full protection by the
Court to recover its dues it cannot be bound down to
adopt only one of the two remedies provided under
the Act. In our opinion, the Corporation can initially
take recourse to Section 31 of the Act but withdraw
or abandon it at any stage and take recourse to the
provisions of Section 29 of the Act, which section
deals with not only the rights but also provides a
self-contained remedy to the Corporation for
recovery of its dues. If the Corporation chooses to
take recourse to the remedy available under Section
31 of the Act and pursues the same to the logical
conclusion and obtains an order or decree, it may
thereafter execute the order or decree, in the manner
provided by Sections 32(7) and (8) of the Act. The
Corporation, however, may withdraw or abandon
the proceedings at that stage and take recourse to
the provisions of Section 29 of the Act. A “decree”
under Section 31 of the Act not being a money
decree or a decree for realisation of the dues of the
Corporation, as held in Gujarat State Financial
Corpn. v. Natson Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd. [Gujarat State
Financial Corpn. v. Natson Mfg. Co. (P) Ltd.,
(1979) 1 SCC 193] , SCC at p. 198, AIR at p. 1768
recourse to it cannot debar the Corporation from
taking recourse to the provisions of Section 29 of the
Act by not pursuing the decree or order under
Section 31 of the Act, in which event the order made
under Section 31 of the Act would serve in aid of the
relief available under Section 29 of the Act.
16. The doctrine of election, as commonly
understood, would, thus, not be attracted under the
Act in view of the express phraseology used in
Section 31 of the Act viz. ‘without prejudice to the
Corporation cannot simultaneously pursue the two
remedies, it is under no disability to take recourse to
the rights and remedy available to it under Section
29 of the Act even after an order under Section 31
has been obtained but without executing it and
withdrawing from those proceedings at any stage.
The use of the expression “without prejudice to the
provisions of Section 29 of the Act” in Section 31
cannot be read to mean that the Corporation after
obtaining a final order under Section 31 of the Act
from a Court of competent jurisdiction, is denuded
of its rights under Section 29 of the Act. To hold so
would render the above-quoted expression
redundant in Section 31 of the Act and the Courts do
not lean in favour of rendering words used by the
Legislature in the statutory provisions redundant.
The Corporation which has the right to make the
choice may make the choice initially whether to
proceed under Section 29 of the Act or Section 31 of
the Act, but its rights under Section 29 of the Act are
not extinguished, if it decides to take recourse to the
provisions of Section 31 of the Act. It can abandon
the proceedings under Section 31 of the Act at any
stage, including the stage of execution, if it finds it
more practical, and may initiate proceedings under
Section 29 of the Act.”
[.....]
41. In Transcore v. Union of India [Transcore v. Union of
India, (2008) 1 SCC 125 : (2008) 1 SCC (Civ) 116], this
Court considered the provisions of the Securitisation and
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Securities Interest Act, 2002 (“the Sarfaesi Act”) and the
Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions
Act, 1993 (“the RDDB Act”), wherein it was held that there
are three elements of election viz. existence of two or more
choice of one of them. If any one of the three elements is not
there, the doctrine will not apply. The judgment in
Transcore was subsequently followed in Mathew Varghese
v. M. Amritha Kumar [Mathew Varghese v. M. Amritha
Kumar, (2014) 5 SCC 610 : (2014) 3 SCC (Civ) 254] ,
where it was held that : (SCC p. 641, para 46)
“46. A reading of Section 37 discloses that the
application of the Sarfaesi Act will be in addition to
and not in derogation of the provisions of the RDDB
Act. In other words, it will not in any way nullify or
annul or impair the effect of the provisions of the
RDDB Act. We are also fortified by our above
statement of law as the heading of the said section also
makes the position clear that application of other laws
are not barred. The effect of Section 37 would,
therefore, be that in addition to the provisions
contained under the Sarfaesi Act, in respect of
proceedings initiated under the said Act, it will be in
order for a party to fall back upon the provisions of the
other Acts mentioned in Section 37, namely, the
Companies Act, 1956, the Securities Contracts
(Regulation) Act, 1956, the Securities and Exchange
Board of India Act, 1992, the Recovery of Debts Due to
Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993, or any
other law for the time being in force.
.....
[..........] ”.
26. From a bare perusal of the judgement in IREO (supra), it is clear that
if the Petitioner has two remedies, which are not identical and are not
concurrent, then the Doctrine of Election will have no application. It is
clearly laid down herein above that this doctrine would not apply if the
27. In the present Appeals, the Appellants are challenging the orders
passed by the Ld. Commercial Court, by which the Petitions under Section 9
of the Act of 1996 were dismissed on the ground that since Petitioners have
already availed a remedy under the RERA Act, they cannot claim relief
under Section 9 of the Act of 1996, as the doctrine of election would apply.
However, this Court is of the opinion that the ld. Commercial Court
dismissed the Petitions without proper application of law and facts. In all the
Petitions adjudicated under Section 9 of the Act of 1996, no Commercial
Court below examined or compared the reliefs sought before the RERA
authorities with those prayed for in the proceedings instituted under Section
9. In the absence of any analysis of the character, scope, timing, and
surrounding circumstances governing the remedies pursued in the two
distinct fora, it was legally impermissible for the concerned Courts to
conclude that the Section 9 petitions were non-maintainable on the ground
that an alternative remedy had already been invoked. Specifically, in light of
facts that there is an arbitration clause in the MOU between the parties,
which requires them to proceed to the arbitration in case of dispute. The bare
reading of the reliefs claimed by Petitioners shows that the remedies sought
by them in two different proceedings are distinct and separate.
SCOPE OF SECTION 9 - INTERIM MEASURES
28. In the present matter, the interim measures sought before the
Commercial Courts were confined to preservation of the allotted
commercial units, restraint on coercive actions such as cancellation of
allotment or creation of third-party rights, and protection against
HARERA’s Orders. These reliefs are ancillary in nature and are designed
to ensure that the arbitral proceedings, once initiated, are not rendered in
vain or illusory.
29. Section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act reads as follows -
“ 9. Interim measures, etc., by Court.—(1) A party may,
before or during arbitral proceedings or at any time after
the making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in
accordance with section 36, apply to a Court—
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person
of unsound mind for the purposes of arbitral proceedings;
or
(ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of
the following matters, namely:—
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any
goods which are the subject-matter of the arbitration
agreement;
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any
property or thing which is the subject matter of the
dispute in arbitration, or as to which any question
may arise therein and authorising for any of the
aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any
land or building in the possession of any party, or
authorising any samples to be taken or any
observation to be made, or experiment to be tried,
which may be necessary or expedient for the
purpose of obtaining full information or evidence;
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a
receiver;
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may
appear to the Court to be just and convenient,
and the Court shall have the same power for making orders
as it has for the purpose of, and in relation to, any
(2) Where, before the commencement of the arbitral
proceedings, a Court passes an order for any interim
measure of protection under sub-section (1), the arbitral
proceedings shall be commenced within a period of ninety
days from the date of such order or within such further time
as the Court may determine.
(3) Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the
Court shall not entertain an application under sub-section
(1), unless the Court finds that circumstances exist which
may not render the remedy provided under section 17
efficacious.”
30. This Court is of the view that under Section 9 of the Act of 1996, the
Court can pass various interim measures of protection, including –
● Preservation of the subject matter of the agreement
● Securing the amount in dispute in arbitration
● As also such other interim measures of protection as it appears to the
Court to be just and convenient.
● The Court is also empowered to appoint receivers or grant an interim
injunction.
31. Thus, the power of the Court under Section 9 of the Act of 1996, is
quite broad and would permit the grant of relief in cases where, prima facie,
a balance of convenience and irreparable injury is made out in favour of the
Petitioner.
32. A Division Bench of the ‘Andhra Pradesh High Court in Vijayawa
Transport, Hyderabad v. A.P. State Civil Supplies Corpn. Ltd., 1982 SCC
OnLine AP 256’ has discussed the scope of granting Interim measures of
the Civil Courts. The relevant extract from the judgment reads as follows :
“The arguments of Sri S. Ranga Reddy, for the
Corporation that power under S. 41(b) of the Arbitration
an arbitrator has been appointed does not appear to be
correct. S. 41 of the Arbitration Act is worded very widely
and empowers a Court to exercise the powers of passing
interim orders and mentioned in the II Schedule not only for
the purpose of an arbitration proceeding, but also in
relating to an arbitration proceeding. An arbitration
proceeding may not be the same thing as an arbitration. An
arbitration proceeding covers a much wider area than an
arbitration in strict sense. In the context of the Arbitration
Act, arbitration proceedings need not necessarily be held to
commence only from the point of time when an arbitration
proper is commenced with the appointment of an Arbitrator
by the Court. Arbitration proceeding would take in a
proceeding taken for the appointment of an Arbitrator.
Construing the language of S. 41 of the Arbitration Act and
considering its purpose, we find no justification to give that
Section such a restricted interpretation that would deny a
civil Court the necessary adjunctive authority and
jurisdiction to entertain any application and grant of any
interim relief so essential for administration of justice. In
many cases obtaining of interim relief is no less important
than obtaining of final relief. Whether we are dead or not in
the long run as Kenyes predicted, many of us may not be
alive to see the fruits of our Court litigation. The fruits of
Court litigation are not oft interred with our bones. It
follows, therefore, that Court jurisdiction to grant an
interim relief should not be lightly denied by interpretation
unless the language used by the Statute is intra table. We
not only find that there is no such clear words of limitation
used in S. 41 of the Arbitration Act compelling us to deny
the Court jurisdiction to grant an interim relief till an
arbitrator is appointed, but on the contrary we also find the
phrase ‘arbitration proceeding’ is wide enough to justify the
granting of interim relief even before an arbitrator is
appointed. The judgment of the Kerala High Court reported
in Baby Paul v. Hindustan Paper Corporation Ltd., AIR
1978 Kerala 223 no doubt supports the view which is
holds that arbitration proceedings commence only on the
arbitrator getting authority to arbitrate and act on that
behalf. According to this view, the applicability of S. 41 of
the Arbitration Act would be postponed till the Court
appoints an arbitrator under S. 20 of the Act. This view of
the law would create a vacuum to meet the situation that
might arise from the time an application for the
appointment of an arbitrator has been made to the Court
and till that application has been disposed of by the Court
by appointing an arbitrator. Considering the fact that S. 41
of the Arbitration Act is a remedial section and provides for
a machinery of justice, we consider it proper not to clog its
operational efficiency and functional effectiveness by such a
restricted interpretation. The language used in the section
also does not compel us to take that view and deny the
Court jurisdiction to exercise this power. For these reasons,
we do not think that we can accept the judgment of the
Kerala High Court in Baby Paul v. Hindustan Paper
Corporation (supra).”
33. In addition, it is established that the jurisdiction under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, is not an adjudicatory substitute for
the final determination of rights, but a supportive mechanism to facilitate
effective dispute resolution through arbitration. The mere fact that a party
has availed a statutory remedy under a special enactment does not, by itself,
denude the Court of jurisdiction to grant interim protection, particularly
where the reliefs sought do not overlap in substance or effect. In the opinion
of this Court, there can be no doubt that persons like the Appellants are
forced to avail of remedies at different stages before different Authorities.
34. Before proceeding further, this Court finds it necessary to refer to the
‘International Commercial Arbitration in UNCITRAL Model Law
“It is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for a
party to request, before or during arbitral proceedings,
from a Court an interim measure of protection and for a
Court to grant such measure.”
It is further stated:
“In certain circumstances, especially where the Arbitral
Tribunal has not yet been established, the issuance of
interim measures by the Court is the only way assets can be
saved for a future arbitration. Otherwise, the claimant could
end up with a worthless arbitral award due to the fact that
the losing party has moved his attachable assets to a ‘safe’
jurisdiction where they are out of reach of the claimant's
seizure. The importance of such a provision in an
arbitration law is therefore evident, and a comparison of the
adopting jurisdictions shows that all jurisdictions include
some kind of provision on the issue, all granting the parties
permission to seek Court-ordered interim measures.”
35. The Courts exercising such jurisdiction under Section 9 of the Act do
not determine the merits of the underlying dispute, but intervene to ensure
that the arbitral process is not rendered futile by unilateral or irreversible
acts of one party. This supportive role of the Court is integral to the arbitral
framework and is premised on the recognition that arbitration, unlike
traditional civil litigation, lacks coercive powers to immediately restrain
actions that may cause irreparable harm.
36. In disputes involving immovable property, particularly in the real
estate sector, the need for interim protection assumes heightened
significance. Property, once alienated, encumbered or subjected to third-
party rights, may become impossible to restore to its original position. The
law, therefore, recognises that preservation of the same is central to
ensuring that the final adjudication, whether by an arbitral tribunal or a
37. On the same lines, in all these Appeals, the Appellants have been
running from pillar to post for the last several years, as is evident from the
proceedings before the HARERA and the Petitions under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, in order to secure their units, which
they have booked. They have made substantial payments to the Respondent
and have not enjoyed any fruits of the said payment.
38. In cases where one party is in a position of dominance, such as a
developer exercising control over possession, allotment, or documentation,
the absence of interim restraint may permit actions that effectively foreclose
the other party’s remedies. Section 9 enables the Court to neutralise such an
imbalance, ensuring procedural fairness and preserving the sanctity of the
arbitral process.
39. Reference may also be made to ‘The Law and Practice of
Commercial Arbitration in England by Mustill and Boyd’, wherein it was
discussed that:
“(b) Safeguarding the subject-matter of the dispute
The existence of a dispute may put at risk the property
which forms the subject of the reference, or the rights of a
party in respect of that property. Thus, the dispute may
prevent perishable goods from being put to their intended
use, or may impede the proper exploitation of a profit-
earning article, such as a ship. If the disposition of the
property has to wait until after the award has resolved the
dispute, unnecessary hardship may be caused to the parties.
Again, there may be a risk that if the property is left in the
custody or control of one of the parties, pending the
hearing, he may abuse his position in such a way that even
if the other party ultimately succeeds in the arbitration, he
will not obtain the full benefit of the award. In cases such as
this, the Court (and in some instances the arbitrator) has
quo until the award is made. The remedies available under
the Act are as follows:
(i) The grant of an interlocutory injunction.
(ii)The appointment of a receiver.
(iii) The making of an order for the preservation, custody or
sale of the property.
(iv) The securing of the amount in dispute.”
INJUNCTION TO PRESERVE THE PROPERTY
40. Moreover, interim injunctions under Section 9 serve multiple
protective functions. They maintain the status quo, prevent dissipation or
alienation of property, restrain coercive actions such as cancellation of
allotment, and ensure that disputed claims are not enforced in a manner that
would cause irreversible prejudice. Such injunctions are not granted as a
matter of course, but are guided by well-established principles of prima facie
case, balance of convenience, and irreparable harm, adapted to the arbitral
context.
41. The importance of injunctions in this context also flows from the
principle that ‘equity intervenes to prevent irreparable injury’. Monetary
compensation may not always be an adequate remedy where immovable
property is involved, particularly when the property is unique, commercially
significant, or forms the core of the contractual relationship. Injunctive
relief, therefore, operates as a means of preventing harm rather than
compensating for it after the fact.
42. The Supreme Court in ‘Adhunik Steels Ltd. v. Orissa Manganese
and Minerals (P) Ltd., (2007) 7 SCC 125’ has observed as under :
“18. The approach that at the initial stage, only the
justified. In Siskina (Cargo Owners) v. Distos Compania
Navieria SA (The Siskina) [1979 AC 210 :(1977) 3 WLR
818 : (1977) 3 All ER 803 (HL)] Lord Diplock explained
the position: (All ER p. 824f-g)
“A right to obtain an interlocutory injunction is not a cause
of action. It cannot stand on its own. It is dependent on
there being a pre-existing cause of action against the
defendant arising out of an invasion, actual or threatened,
by him of a legal or equitable right of the plaintiff for the
enforcement of which the defendant is amenable to the
jurisdiction of the Court. The right to obtain an
interlocutory injunction is merely ancillary and incidental
to the pre-existing cause of action. It is granted to preserve
the status quo pending the ascertainment by the Court of the
rights of the parties and the grant to the plaintiff of the relief
to which his cause of action entitles him, which may or may
not include a final injunction.”
43. A full Bench of the Supreme Court in Wander Ltd. v. Antox India (P)
Ltd., 1990 Supp SCC 727, while discussing the scope of an interlocutory
injunction, has held as under :
“9. Usually, the prayer for grant of an interlocutory
injunction is at a stage when the existence of the legal right
asserted by the plaintiff and its alleged violation are both
contested and uncertain and remain uncertain till they are
established at the trial on evidence. The Court, at this stage,
acts on certain well-settled principles of administration of
this form of interlocutory remedy which is both temporary
and discretionary. The object of the interlocutory
injunction, it is stated
“...is to protect the plaintiff against injury by
violation of his rights for which he could not
adequately be compensated in damages recoverable
in the action if the uncertainty were resolved in his
favour at the trial. The need for such protection must
be weighed against the corresponding need of the
from his having been prevented from exercising his
own legal rights for which he could not be
adequately compensated. The Court must weigh one
need against another and determine where the
‘balance of convenience’ lies.”
The interlocutory remedy is intended to preserve in status
quo, the rights of parties which may appear on a prima
facie case. The Court also, in restraining a defendant from
exercising what he considers his legal right but what the
plaintiff would like to be prevented, puts into the scales, as a
relevant consideration whether the defendant has yet to
commence his enterprise or whether he has already been
doing so in which latter case considerations somewhat
different from those that apply to a case where the
defendant is yet to commence his enterprise, are attracted.”
44. Also, in the case of ‘Sir Ganga Ram and Sons v. Punjab State
Electricity Board, 1973 SCC OnLine P&H 87, it was observed that:
“6. It is true that the main dispute between the parties
would be settled by the arbitrators if the application under
section 34 succeeds and it is held that the matter in dispute
has been agreed to be referred to arbitration. But we are
concerned with a situation where the matter in dispute has
not yet gone to the arbitrators and one of the parties wants
an injunction from the dun regarding the preservation of the
property in dispute. Among the five items mentioned in the
Second Schedule, the power of the Court is also regarding
the preservation and the interim custody of any goods which
are the subject-matter of the reference vide item No. 1 in the
said schedule. Item No. 3 thereof deals with the detention,
preservation or inspection of any property and item No. 4
specifically deals with interim injunctions. In my opinion,
therefore, the Court had the power to make an order of a
temporary injunction regarding the preservation of the
property in dispute. The reason for this also seems to be
quite simple, because, if ultimately the dispute is referred to
the award will become meaningless if, in the meantime, the
property in dispute is wasted or disposed of by any of the
parties to the litigation. It is precisely for that reason that
the Court has been empowered under section 41 of the
Arbitration Act to pass interim orders in respect of the
matters, which have been set out in the Second Schedule
irrespective of the fact whether one of the parties had
already made an application under section 34 of the
Arbitration Act before the said Court. It perhaps might have
been a different matter if the power to issue temporary
injunctions regarding the preservation of the property had
also been specifically agreed to be referred to arbitration in
the contract between the parties, but that is not the position
in the instant case.”
45. Thus, in the present Appeals, the reliefs before HARERA were
regulatory and determinative, whereas the reliefs under Section 9 were
preventive and preservative. The failure of the Commercial Court to
appreciate this vital distinction has resulted in a conflation of jurisdictions
and an erroneous conclusion on maintainability.
B. Second Issue pertains to the limited and protective nature of
jurisdiction exercised under Section 9
46. Impugned Orders in FAO (COMM.) 204/2025, FAO (COMM.)
211/2025, FAO (COMM.) 237/2025, FAO (COMM.) 238/2025, and FAO
(COMM.) 239/2025, however, proceed on a broad proposition that
invocation of remedies under the RERA Act constitutes an absolute bar to
the maintainability of proceedings under Section 9. Such an approach
overlooks the settled position that concurrent remedies may coexist,
vexatious or oppressive. The test is not the identity of parties or transactions,
but the identity of reliefs and the nature of jurisdiction exercised.
47. However, as regards the reasoning adopted in the Impugned Judgment
dated 09.06.2025 in FAO (COMM.) 210/2025 on the issue of territorial
jurisdiction, it is noted that the Ld. District Judge appears to have adopted an
unduly technical approach by drawing a distinction in the venue of
Arbitration between “Delhi” and “New Delhi”, as reflected in Paragraph 14
of the said order (CHART 2) (supra). In proceedings under Section 9 of the
Act of 1996, such a narrow territorial distinction was not warranted.
48. On consideration being made to CHART 2 (supra), in:-
• OMP (I) (COMM.) No. 485/2025 & OMP (I) (COMM.) No.
486/2025, no reasoning has been given as to how the reliefs sought
before HARERA and under Section 9 Petition are the same.
• OMP (I) (COMM.) No. 487/2025, OMP (I) (COMM.) No.
488/2025 & OMP (I) (COMM.) No. 489/2025,
a. The court did not consider the judgment relied upon by
Petitioner in Priyanka Taksh Sood & Ors. Vs Sunworld Residency
Pvt. Ltd & Anr., 2022 SCC Online Delhi 4717.
b. Also prayers of both the Petitions were not compared and
applied the ‘Doctrine of Election of Remedy’ without considering it
properly.
c. The Court held that ‘Respondent’ had the right to let out the
property in dispute, hence no relief can be granted to Petitioner. But,
the Petitioner herein was not seeking relief before the Court to get the
adjudication of his rights, but to protect the property until the
and decide upon the rights & liabilities of the parties, in case there is
an arbitration clause in the Agreement. Whether the property was
rightly or wrongly let out could not have been decided by Ld.
Commercial Court, and even this Court is not to pass any order on the
merits of the case, while considering the grant of interim relief only.
49. In ‘Priyanka Taksh Sood & Ors. Vs Sunworld Residency Pvt. Ltd &
Anr., 2022 SCC Online Delhi 4717’, the following was observed by the
Apex Court-
“32. From the foregoing, there is no doubt in the mind of
this Court that, giving a purposive interpretation to
Sections 79, 88 and 89 of the RERA Act, there is no bar
under the RERA Act from application of concurrent
remedy under the A&C Act, and thus, there is no clash
between the provisions of the RERA Act and the A&C
Act, as the remedies available under the former are in
addition to, and not in supersession of, the remedies
available under the A&C Act.”
50. The Ld. Commercial Court failed to appreciate the judgment rendered
in Priyanka Taksh Sood (supra), which was relied upon by the Appellant
before the Court below. The said order ought to have been duly considered,
as the reasoning therein directly supports the Appellant’s case on the
maintainability of the Petition under Section 9 of the Act of 1996, in terms
of the provisions of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act,
2016 and the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
51. Accordingly, this Court is of the view that the dismissal of the Section
9 Petitions on the ground of overlap of reliefs is unsustainable in law and
52. At this stage, it is also worth mentioning that the Respondent has laid
considerable emphasis on the alleged execution of a Lease Deed dated
30.06.2025 in favour of M/s Vexto Commercials Pvt. Ltd., purportedly in
respect of the entire Third Floor of Neo Square Building, Sector-109,
Gurugram, Haryana, comprising multiple units, for a period of nine years.
The very existence of the said Lease Deed is vehemently denied by the
Appellants. It is the specific case of the Appellants that M/s Vexto
Commercials Pvt. Ltd. is a sham and bogus entity, whose promoters are
intrinsically and inextricably linked to the Respondent. It has further been
pointed out that the said company itself came to be incorporated only on
06.05.2025, casting serious doubt on the genuineness and bona fides of the
alleged transaction.
53. On the basis of the submissions made by the ld. Counsel for the
Respondent, in order to balance the competing claims, the Court vide order
dated 18.09.2025, directed as under:
“i) The Respondent shall, deposit the entire lease
amount being earned qua each of the Appellants
and in respect of each of the units which belong to
the Appellants with the worthy Registrar General
of this Court. The date of lease entered into by the
Respondent is stated to be from 30th June, 2025,
therefore, from 1st July, 2025 onwards, the entire
rent amount, without any deduction, applicable to
the units of Appellants shall be deposited by 30th
September, 2025 by Respondent with the worthy
Registrar General of this Court. Going forward, the
said rent from 1st October, 2025 onwards shall be
deposited by the Respondent by 15th of each month
with the worthy Registrar General. The entire
amount received shall be kept in a fixed deposit on
ii) The Appellants and the Respondent shall file
computations of all the amounts which are due to
them in respect of each of the units by at least one
week before the next date of hearing.
[...]”
54. As per the above order, the lease amount was to be deposited before
the Court which was not done.
55. Thereafter, the Report of the Local Commissioner dated 05.10.2025
was received by this Court, along with the photographs annexed thereto. The
Report of the Local Commissioner clearly demonstrate that the mall in
question is neither fully complete nor occupied. The photographs reveal that
renovation and construction activities are still being carried out on the Third
Floor, thereby rendering the said premises uninhabitable and unfit for any
commercial use as on date.
56. Prima facie, therefore, the alleged execution of the Lease Deed, as
projected by the Respondent, appears to be a sham transaction, seemingly
brought into existence with the sole object of defeating the purpose and
intent of the Memorandum of Understanding and to unlawfully deny the
Appellants their legitimate rights, thereby causing undue hardship to them.
57. Having regard to the legal position crystallised by the precedents
discussed and the findings recorded herein, this Court is of the considered
view that the Appellants have made out a fit case for interference.
Accordingly, and in consequence of the foregoing reasons, the present
Appeals are allowed to the effect that:-
a. The Respondent and their agents, servants, attorneys, heirs,
contractors, labourers, representatives, etc., are restrained
not limited to, that of leasing out the property till the
commencement of Arbitration proceedings;
b. The Respondent is further directed to maintain status quo in
relation to the respective Units under the BBA or MOU till the
commencement of the Arbitration proceedings;
c. Once the Arbitral tribunal is constituted, either of the parties
may seek modification of this order from the Arbitral
Tribunal.
58. All Appeals are allowed. Pending applications, if any, are disposed of.
SHAIL JAIN
JUDGE
PRATHIBA M. SINGH
JUDGE
DECEMBER 24, 2025
HP/MM/CK