COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: O.M.P. (COMM) 548/2020 & O.M.P. (COMM) 128/2021
DATE: 20.12.2025
PLAINTIFF: Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) / Strategic Engineering Pvt. Ltd.
DEFENDENT: Strategic Engineering Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. / Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC)
JUDGE: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Jasmeet Singh

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. These are cross petitions filed under Section 34 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (“1996 Act”) seeking to set aside the Arbitral
Award dated 14.12.2019 passed in the matter of “Technology
Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council v. M/s Strategic
Engineering P. Ltd.” wherein some claims of both contesting parties
were allowed and some claims were disallowed. Both the parties have
filed their respective petition to challenge the said Award.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
2. Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council
(“TIFAC”), claimant before the Arbitrator, is a registered society under
the administrative control of the Department of Science & Technology,
Ministry of Science & Technology, Government of India.
3. M/s Strategic Engineering Pvt. Ltd. (“SEPL”), respondent before the
Arbitrator, is a company involved in the business of manufacture and
trade of engineering equipment.
4. The parties along with Madras Institute of Technology (“MIT”),
executed a Tripartite Agreement dated 22.12.1999 being Technology
Development Assistance Agreement (“TDA”), whereby SEPL sought
the support of TIFAC to design and develop the composite refill
cylinders for Compressed Natural Gas (“Project”).
5. The approximate cost of the project was Rs. 5.78 crores out of which
the share of SEPL was Rs. 2.98 crores and the financial assistance to be
contributed by TIFAC was to be upto Rs. 2.80 crores.
6. The said TDA contained an arbitration clause being Clause No. XVI.
“a. If any dispute or difference arises between the Parties
hereto as to the construction, interpretation, effect and
implication of any provision of this Agreement including the
rights or liabilities or any claim or demand of any Party
against other or in regard to any matter under these presents
but excluding any matters, decisions of determination of which
is expressly provided for in this Agreement, such disputes or
differences shall be referred to the sole arbitration of the
Secretary of the Department of Science &Technology,
Government of India, or that of his nominee and his decision
will be final and shall be binding on all the Parties. A
reference to the arbitration under this Clause shall be deemed
to be submission within the meaning of the Arbitration Act,
1940, and the rules framed there under for the time being in
force.
b. If the “COMPANY” does not make any claim or demand or
raise any dispute of difference in terms of Sub Clause “a” of
this Clause within six months from the date on which such
claim or demand arises, the “COMPANY” shall deem to have
waived and abandoned such claim or demand or the right to
raise such dispute or difference against “TIFAC”.
c. The venue of the Arbitration shall be at Delhi.”
7. Pursuant to the execution of TDA, a Hypothecation Agreement was
entered into between the parties, wherein the financial Assistance
provided by TIFAC was secured by a second charge by way of
8. In terms of the TDA, the Advisory and Monitoring Committee
(“AMC”) was constituted with Prof. S.C. Lakkad of IIT- Mumbai as the
Chairman and comprising of technical experts like engineers,
professors, scientists having the knowledge and expertise in the field of
science and technology. The said Committee was constituted to assess
the progress of the project from time to time.
9. Facts as per TIFAC (Petitioner in O.M.P. (COMM.)548/2020)
9.1 During the 5th meeting of AMC dated 24.08.2001, upon examining
the progress of the project, and on observation of one of the AMC
members, the AMC declared the project a success and remarked that
SEPL would have to repay the financial assistance received by it as
per the TDA.
9.2 SEPL during the 6th AMC meeting submitted 12 post dated cheques
in favour of TIFAC which were towards the repayment of financial
assistance received by it. The AMC also accepted SEPL’s request
for restructuring the repayment process.
9.3 The said post dated cheques delivered by SEPL were dishonoured.
Thereafter, SEPL made a few repayments by way of demand drafts
to the tune of Rs. 4,00,000/-.
9.4 SEPL vide various letters dated 19.02.2003, 25.02.2003, 23.04.2003
and 06.05.2003 requested TIFAC to reschedule the repayment from
time to time. SEPL also gave assurance for repayment in its letter
dated 10.10.2003. SEPL also admitted its liability to repay even in
its balance sheet dated 31.03.2006 mentioning that the sum of Rs.
2,76,00,000 was due to TIFAC. SEPL also admitted its liability to
Court.
9.5 TIFAC filed a civil suit for recovery of money bearing CS (OS)
2265/2007. The same was disposed of vide Consent Order dated
29.09.2008 and the parties were referred to arbitration.
10. Facts as per SEPL (Petitioner in O.M.P. (COMM.) 128/2021)
10.1 TIFAC disbursed a sum of Rs. 2.80 crores for the said project to
SEPL by UBI cheques dated 22.12.1999, 14.03.2000 and
29.11.2001.
10.2 The time for completion of the said project was 24 months which
was extended by the AMC for a further period of 2 months for
procurement of the 3 Axis Filament Winding Machine
(“Machine”).
10.3 In the 5th AMC meeting SEPL was informed that Type II composite
CNG Cylinders had been successfully developed using two axis
filament winding system. However, the ultimate aim of the said
project was successful commercial production of Type III cylinders
and not Type II cylinders. The project was still incomplete merely at
the design of Type II cylinder. The AMC in the same meeting
recommended the release of Rs. 1.85 crore by TIFAC for
procurement of the Machine.The project could have achieved
commercial viability only upon successful commercial production
of Type III cylinders for which the Machine was an essential
requirement and hence the declaration that the project was a success
by the AMC in the fifth meeting was wrong.
10.4 Pursuant to the AMC meeting, TIFAC paid the sum of Rs. 1.85
the project was nowhere complete. Thereafter, SEPL placed an
order for procurement of the Machine on M/s Entech USA on
19.10.2001. The whole amount of Rs. 1.85 crore was paid by SEPL
to M/s Entech, USA towards sale consideration for the Machine.
However, due to reasons beyond the control SEPL, the said machine
was taken back by the US Custom Authorities after it had reached
Singapore due to its dual Application possibility to cater to the
requirement in the field of space and defence.
10.5 SEPL fought a legal battle in the courts of USA and consequently,
the Machine was finally released in August, 2003. However, while
releasing the Machine, the Axis of the Machine was removed by the
Custom Authorities and only a 2 Axis Filament Winding Machine
could be received. The entire project was based on the 3 Axis
Filament Winding Machine and hence the ultimate objective of the
project, that is, successful production and commercialization of
Type III Cylinders was never achieved.
10.6 However, SEPL herein, in bonafide interest and utmost good faith
with the intention of securing relationship for the successful
completion of Phase-V of the project, issued 12 Post Dated cheques
on the assurance of TIFAC that the same were only for the purpose
of audit records and will not be presented for seeking payment at any
time. TIFAC, with malafide intentions, presented the said cheques
despite repeated requests made by SEPL not to present them.
Therefore, the cheques were returned with an endorsement
“insufficient funds”
hope that the Machine would be procured soon and thereafter when
project succeeds, the repayment process can be started. Since, the
required Machine was never procured, consequently, the project
could not become a success and therefore, the question of repayment
did not arise.
10.8 TIFAC preferred Complaints under Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 against SEPL and its Directors. In the Civil
Suit filed by TIFAC, vide consent order dated 29.09.2008, the
matter was referred to the Sole Arbitrator, who made and
pronounced the Award dated 14.12.2019.
11. The Arbitrator adjudicated the dispute between the parties and held as
under-
“1. Since the project was not taken to a fruitful conclusion,
SEPL need not contribute funds to TIFAC as per the TDA
Agreement.
2. While SEPL need not contribute funds to TIFAC as per the
TDA Agreement, it is logical that TIFAC recovers a part of
its investments on the project by selling/auctioning plant and
machineries acquired under the project and distributing the
proceeds as per the TDA and Hypothecation Agreements.
This action may be completed within three months of passing
of this award.
3. In case SEPL wants to retain the set of plant and
machineries acquired under the project, they may do so after
paying Rs 28 lakhs minus Rs 4 lakhs already paid by SEPL
4. SEPL may immediately pay Rs 5 lakhs for wrongly
securing TIFAC investment through a guarantor - company
(PCACPL) whose management functionaries were same as
that of SEPL, and for failing to bring these management
functionaries to appear in the Arbitration proceedings in
spite of repeated orders of the Arbitrator. This amount of Rs
5 lakhs may be paid as contribution to the Prime Minister's
Relief Fund within three months and copies of the receipt
may be sent to Arbitrator and TIFAC.
5. TIFAC may also pay Rs 5 lakhs penalty for casually
accepting such a guarantor - company (PCACPL) whose
management functionaries were same as that of SEPL, in
order secure its investments. This amount of Rs 5 lakhs may
be paid as contribution to the Prime Minister's Relief Fund
within three months and copies of the receipt may be sent to
Arbitrator and SEPL.
6. SEPL could have utilized plant and machineries acquired
under the project to manufacture some products of their own
business interest and thereby contributing to the national
economy as well. They did not do so. SEPL is asked to pay
back 10% of Rs 280 lakhs of tax-payers money (channelized
through TIFAC) that is Rs 28 lakhs to TIFAC in two
three-monthly instalments.
7. Further, TIFAC may pay another Rs 5 lakhs penalty for so
casually formulating, and managing such a project of
contribution to the Prime Minister's Relief Fund within three
months and copies of the receipt may be sent to Arbitrator
and SEPL.”
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF TIFAC
12. Mr. D Bhattacharya, learned counsel appearing on behalf of TIFAC,
vehemently challenges the Award.
13. Mr. Bhattacharya, learned counsel states that as per the Clauses V, VIII
and IX the repayment of the amount was dependent upon the success in
development of the technology and not on any commercial outcome.
He challenges the said reasoning of the Arbitrator wherein he holds that
the success of the project is dependent upon the commercial outcome of
the said project. He places reliance on Union of India v. Selan
Exploration Technology Ltd., 2010 SCC OnLine Del 3872, wherein it
was held that “no clause of the contract can be given a go-bye and an
interpretation which goes contrary to an express term of the contract
can certainly not be adopted.”and states that the Arbitrator has all
together ignored the material clauses of the contract.
14. He submits that the impugned Award itself records that no reliance has
been placed on any document prepared with the assistance or guidance
of the MIT, ostensibly to avoid any confusion. Therefore, it is clear that
the Arbitrator has erroneously held that SEPL is not liable to repay the
financial assistance on the grounds that there was no “commercial
success”, or that there was no application or utilisation of the
technology by SEPL, or that the project was not taken to its logical and
fruitful conclusion. It is contended that such findings are wholly
in law.
15. It is submitted by the learned counsel that the Arbitrator did not have
the jurisdiction to decide whether the project was a failure or a success.
The same came under the purview of the AMC.
16. He submits that the Award fails to take note of the fact that, pursuant to
the AMC’s meetings dated 05.11.2002 and 06.11.2002, SEPL
deposited cheques towards repayment of the financial assistance on
21.10.2002, under cover of a letter dated 21.10.2002. Even thereafter,
SEPL continued to deposit additional cheques towards repayment, vide
letters dated 19.02.2003, 25.02.2003, 25.02.2003, 23.04.2003 and
06.05.2003.
17. He draws my attention to the categorical findings of the Arbitrator that
the AMC had declared the project as a “success” and that SEPL never
raised any objection to such declaration at any point of time and,
therefore, the said declaration should be relied upon and argues that
Arbitrator erroneously declined to hold that the project was
“successful” by introducing extraneous considerations such as
“commercialisation” and “market acceptance”. The Award further
proceeds on an incorrect assumption that a declaration of “success”
could only be made upon the so-called commercialisation of the
project. These conclusions are directly contrary to the express terms of
the contract, which was “successful development of the technology”.
The development of technology was not dependent either on
commercial exploitation or market acceptability. These two factors are
extraneous to the terms of the contract and by relying upon
judging the project as successful, the Arbitrator has re-written the terms
of the Contract and hence, the findings are perverse to the evidence on
record. He places reliance on Dyna Technologies (P) Ltd. v. Crompton
Greaves Ltd.1
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SEPL
18. Mr. A.K. Thakur, learned counsel for SEPL, opposes the challenges
posed by learned counsel of TIFAC and he further challenges the
Award only to the extent of finding No. 6 on the ground of the same
being perverse and contradictory to the findings of the Award itself.
19. He states that the AMC could not have been treated as the final
authority, since its very decision constituted the subject matter of
dispute which was referred to arbitration. Once the decision of the
AMC was under challenge before the Arbitrator, the decision of the
AMC could not have attained finality or bind the parties. The minutes
of the 5th AMC meeting are contradictory in itself and hence TIFAC has
wrongly placed reliance on the same.
20. He points out that the issue of repayment would only arise after the
project was declared as successful, which was wrongly done by the
AMC. Therefore, the subject matter of the dispute was the said report.
Moreover, the Arbitrator, himself was a senior scientist and technocrat,
has independently examined the decision taken by the AMC and
rendered his findings thereon. The submission of TIFAC that the AMC
is the final authority cannot be accepted as then there would be no
disputes between the parties to be referred to Arbitration.
21. He further states that the decision in the 5th AMC meeting dated
24.08.2001 cannot be relied upon as it is in itself contradictory. It is
apparent upon the bare reading of the minutes of the meeting. On one
hand AMC declared the project as successful and on the other hand it
was directed to TIFAC to release the money to SEPL for procurement
of the Machine.
22. It is emphasised that the contention of TIFAC that the cheques were
given in the form of repayment is absolutely erroneous. The cheques
were provided by SEPL in good faith and only upon the procurement of
the Machine and aluminium linear, the project would become a success.
As per the terms envisaged under the TDA the repayment would only
begin at the successful completion of the said Project and its
commercial utilisation. Since, the project was neither successful nor
attained commercial viability therefore the question of repayment did
not arise.
23. He points out that the cheques were issued on October, 2002 which is a
year prior to the arrival of the Machine. TIFAC illegally and arbitrarily
encashed the said cheques more than six months prior to the arrival of
the Machine. The Machine arrived on 05.09.2003, which is evident
from the bill of entry as stamped by the Chennai Custom Authorities
whereas the cheque was presented for repayment by TIFAC in January,
2003.
24. He submits that the cheques were submitted by SEPL to TIFAC as
SEPL wanted to continue the work. The same is evident from the fact
that an amount of Rs. 4,00,000 was also paid by SEPL. This amount
was not in pursuance of repayment obligation, as the same would have
evident from the findings of the Arbitrator that the project was not
successfully completed.
25. Challenging the finding No. 6 of the Award, Mr. Thakur submits that
Arbitrator himself has observed that the declaration of the project as
“successful” after the 5th AMC meeting was erroneous, particularly in
view of the fact that the funds for procurement of the Machine were
released only after the said meeting. In such circumstances, the project
could not, in any manner, have been declared successful. Therefore, the
finding of the Arbitrator directing SEPL to pay a sum of Rs. 28,00,000/to TIFAC as SEPL could have utilized plant and machineries acquired
under the project to manufacture some products of their own business
interest and thereby contributing to the national economy as well and
they did not do so, is contrary to the evidence and material placed on
record. He places reliance on SBP and Co. vs Patel Engineering and
Anr.2
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
26. I have heard the learned counsels for the parties and perused the
material on record.
27. Before proceedings with the objections raised by the parties, it is
pertinent to reiterate the scope of interference under Section 34 of the
1996 Act. The scope under section 34 of the 1996 Act is very limited
and narrow as the Court does not sit in appeal over the Award or
reviews the Award passed by the Arbitral Tribunal or re-appreciates the
evidence. Further, it is the prerogative of the Arbitral Tribunal to
interpret the term of the Contract and if the Arbitral Tribunal has
adopted a view which is plausible, the Court is not required to interfere
even if an alternate view is possible. To set aside the Award, the Award
must fall under any of the grounds as mentioned in section 34 of the
1996 Act. One of the grounds, amongst other, pertains to patent
illegality. Section 34 (2A) of the 1996 Act provides that if the Award is
patently illegal then it is liable to be set aside. The Award is said to be
patently illegal if it is contrary to substantive provisions of law of India,
or provisions of the 1996 Act or the terms of the contract.3 Reliance is
placed on OPG Power Generation (P) Ltd. v. Enexio Power Cooling
Solutions (India) (P) Ltd.4.
28. With these principles, I shall now consider the rival contentions of the
parties.
TIFAC’s Challenge to the Award (O.M.P (COMM) 548/2020)
29. TIFAC’s primary challenge to the Award is based on the finding of the
AMC that the Project was successful and the same was declared by the
5th AMC meeting. Therefore, in terms of Clause No. IX of the TDA,
SEPL is liable to pay Rs. 3.36 crores.
30. It is the contention of TIFAC that the repayment is dependent upon
success in development of the technology and not its commercial
outcome. The finding of the Arbitrator that the project needs to attain
commercial viability for repayments to begin, is misplaced. Further, the
SEPL never objected to the said certification of AMC in the 5th and 6th
meeting, that the technology has been developed successfully. The
Arbitrator also supported the said contention and gave a finding that
3Associate Builders v. DDA, (2015) 3 SCC 49.
SEPL never objected to the declaration in AMC’s 5th and 6th meeting. In
terms of Clause No. VIII before declaring the project as successful,
TIFAC was required to take into consideration any objections raised by
SEPL or MIT. Since no such objections were raised by SEPL or MIT,
there was no hinderance in declaring the project as successful. On the
issue of submitting the cheques, it is the contention of TIFAC that the
cheques were submitted for repayment in terms of Clause IX of the
TDA.
31. On the contrary it is the contention of SEPL that the obligation of
repayment does not arise until the project has achieved commercial
viability. The AMC in 5th meeting has erroneously held that the project
is a success whereas only Type II cylinders were developed and not
Type III cylinders.
32. Before delving into analysis of the facts and terms of the TDA, it is
pertinent to highlight some important recitals and terms and conditions
of the TDA. The “Company” here refers to SEPL. The same reads as
under:
“WHEREAS the “COMPANY” is also desirous of further
work with the assistance of “MIT” in the up-scaling of the
“PRODUCT”/“PROCESS” to acquire the capability for
commercialization.
xxxx
“WHEREAS the “COMPANY” is convinced about the
·viability of “PRODUCT”/“PROCESS” after having
discussions with “MIT” and has expressed confidence in
WHEREAS “TIFAC” and the “COMPANY” are willing to
support financially and technically the “PROJECT” for the
development of the “PRODUCT”/“PROCESS” for the
ultimate commercial exploitation.
xxxx
I. DEFINITIONS
....
C. “PROJECT” means and includes the work
involving development of total technology package of
“PRODUCT”/“PROCESS” for ultimate
commercialization...
II. PROJECT AND SCHEDULES
The "PROJECT" covered under this Agreement aims at:
a. Designing of high pressure composite cylinders for
storage of Compressed Natural Gas by analysis of CNG
cylinder designs using FEM for various size and
pressure, for optimum fibre orientation and lay-up
sequences for fabrication purposes.
b. Development of design data and detailed procedures for
the fabrication of composite refill Gas cylinder for
CNG.
c. Testing of the cylinders for typical load applications like
pressure, impact, fatigue, crashworthiness and
vibration.
d. To pave the way for a closer Industry and Institute
e. To develop a commercially viable technology to
indigenously produce CNG Cylinder.
Details of the activities envisaged and the approximate
schedules are provided in the Project Document
submitted by the "COMPANY" to "TIFAC" which is
appended herewith (ANNEXURE - I).”
(emphasis supplied)
33. In this respect, it is important to shed light upon the relevant clauses of
TDA. The clauses read as under:
“VIII. SUCCESSFUL DECLARATION OF THE
PROJECT
Successful development of technology shall be deemed to be
completed when the Advisory and Monitoring Committee
certifies to the effect in writing and is accepted by “TIFAC”.
The views of “MIT” and the “COMPANY” shall also be
considered by “TIFAC”. The decision of “TIFAC” in this
regard shall be final and binding on all the Parties.”
“IX CONTRIBUTION OF FUNDS TO “TIFAC” BY
“COMPANY”
If the development of technology is successful as declared by
the Advisory & Monitoring Committee, the company shall
contribute funds without any condition to “TIFAC” by way
of an amount not exceeding Rs.336.00 lakhs (Rupees Three
Hundred and Thirty-six lakhs only) in five yearly instalments,
each instalment being Rs.67.20 lakhs (Rupees Sixty-seven
[NB : The total repayment amount would be 1.2 times the
financial assistance extended by TIFAC to the Company.]
....”
(emphasis supplied)
34. On perusal of the minutes of the 5th AMC meeting dated 24.08.2001, it
is evident that the AMC declared that project to be successful. Even Mr.
Vishwanath, Managing Director of SEPL informed the committee
about the successful development of Type II cylinders. Based on the
said statement the further discussion in the meeting took place and Mr.
Biswas commented about the success of the project. The minutes of the
meeting dated 24.08.2001 are reproduced as under:
“Advanced Composites Mission
Fifth Advisory & Monitoring Committee meeting for
project on „Composite CNG Cylinders for Automobiles‟
Date: August 24, 2001
Venue: Strategic Engineering Pvt. Ltd., Manamadurai
The list of the Advisory & Monitoring Committee (AMC)
members and other participants is given as Annexure-1.
At the outset, Mr. Viswanath welcomed all the AMC
members especially Shri K L Agrawal of Global Composites
International, USA & overseas consultant for the project and
Mr. Steven Hutchinson of Authorised Testing Inc., USA. Mr.
Viswanath informed the Committee that under the guidance
of Dr. Agrawal, SEPL has designed the carbon composite
cylinders with aluminium liners - the same has been
production. He further remarked that the presence of Mr.
Steven Hutchinson was mandatory for witnessing the
composite cylinder fabrication and testing for pressure
cycling test & hydrostatic burst test for DOT approval.
Mr. Viswanath informed the Committee at Strategic
Engineering has successfully developed composite CNG
cylinder (Type-2) for cars. Type-2 cylinders comprise a steel
liner hoop wrapped with glass fibre by filament winding over
the cylindrical portion of the liner so that the filaments
provide additional strength only in the hoop direction and
not in the longitudinal direction of cylinder. A typical steel
liner with - 65 L capacity with wall thickness of 4.5mm and
dome thickness of 12mm was „hoop wrapped‟ with 8-9 Kgs.
of FRP. The total weight of such FRP CNG cylinder was
around 58 Kgs. as against of 68-72 Kgs of all steel cylinder.
The hoop wrapped cylinders were successfully tested for
pressure cycling test & hydrostatic burst test. Mr. Viswanath
further informed that two such cylinders would be shipped to
Authorized Testing Inc., USA for carrying out the bonfire
test.
Mr. Hutchinson described various tests required to be
carried out on the composite CNG cylinder for DOT
approval. Under Pressure Cycling Test, the cylinder is
pressurized to not more than 10 percent of the service
pressure for 13,000 cycles and up to 125 percent of the
to be tested to withstand 2.25 times the service pressure for
Hydrostatic Burst Test. Mr. Hutchinson informed the
Committee that the Bonfire Test could only be done at their
laboratory in USA and would require two cylinders. For
bonfire test, the cylinder (equipped with a pressure release
device) filled with CNG is placed horizontally. Three
thermocouples are attached at the container's bottom
(midpoint) and one at each end where the dome end meets the
container sidewall. The entire cylinder is then subjected to
the flame (temperature between 850°-900° C for 20 minutes
duration or till its contents are completely vented). If the test
container is 165 cm in length or less, it needs to be placed in
the upright position.
Mr. Hutchinson further informed the Committee that
cylinders to qualify as per NGV2-2 standards, they are tested
more stringently. NGV2-2 standards clearly specify the
chemical composition of the liner material, its mechanical
properties, pressure cycle, burst test, composite flaw
tolerance test, drop test, bonfire test, accelerated stress
rupture test and penetration test. While for DOT approval as
per code # 571.304, the cylinders are required to be tested
for pressure cycle test, burst test and bonfire test only. Mr.
Hutchinson observed that the composite CNG cylinders have
been tested successfully as per DOT code # 571.304. He was
quite hopeful that the cylinders would also qualify in the
of compliance for composite cylinders, manufactured by
SEPL, with DOT standards by end September 2001.
Mr. Ramakrishnan informed the Committee that chemical
& mechanical properties of the liner have been ascertained.
The liner was subjected to hydrostatic burst pressure test.
The liner passed the requirement of withstanding 125 percent
of the service pressure.
Mr. Balakrishnan remarked that every CNG cylinder is
permanently labeled with a serial no. and a certificate is
issued by the Chief Controller of Explosives (CCOE), Govt.
of India. The vehicle fitted with a CNG cylinder has to be type
approved by ARAI, Pune. ARAI does a comprehensive test of
the CNG cylinder, fixing arrangement of the cylinder, safety
valve etc. before clearing the vehicle for regular production
by the automobile manufacturer. He informed that all steel
cylinders are inspected/tested after 5 years of service life.
Mr. Biswas informed that a meeting has been arranged
with the Chief Controller of Explosives at Nagpur on 29th
August for discussion regarding approval. Prof. Lakkad
advised that we should go prepared with all relevant
standards on the subject.
Mr. Hutchinson informed that steel lined composite
cylinders needs to be inspected/tested after every 3 years of
service life and aluminum lined composite cylinder are
Mr. Viswanath remarked that Strategic Engineering
would be placing an order for procuring 3-axis filament
winding machine and would simultaneously interact with
CCOE for necessary approval. He requested the AMC to
extend the project period up to February 2002, to enable
SEPL carry out a market seeding of Type-2 cylinders in
India.
The Committee was satisfied with the technical progress
& recommended an extension of project period by two
months i.e. up to February 2002. The Committee advised
SEPL for sourcing suitable steel liners from
domestic/overseas market for production of Type-2 CNG
cylinders. The Committee also desired that SEPL should
identify sources for procuring aluminium liners for Type-3
CNG cylinders as the next step. The Committee
recommended the release of final TDA instalment amounting
to Rs.185.00 lakhs by TIFAC for procurement of 3-axis
filament winding machine subject to the satisfactory progress
in CCOE's approval
Mr. Biswas commented that the project has achieved the
stipulated objectives as stated in the project proposal. The
Advisory & Monitoring Committee declared the project as a
success and remarked that Strategic Engineering would
repay technology development assistance as per the
The Committee while noting the progress of activities
finalized the following action-plan to be complied with by
SEPL before the next AMC meeting to be held sometime in
February 2002:
a. Certificate for Bonfire test from Authorised Testing Inc.,
USA by Sept 21, 2001.
b. Certificate for Type-2 CNG cylinder from Authorised
Testing Inc., USA manufactured as per DOT standards by
September 30, 2001.
c. 3-axis filament winding machine required for large-scale
production of Type-2 FRP CNG cylinders to be procured by
mid February 2002.
The Committee members also witnessed a hydrostatic
burst test carried out on type-2 CNG cylinder after the
cylinder had been subjected to pressure cycling test. The
cylinder withstood 8000 bar of hydrostatic pressure before
bursting at the cylindrical portion.”
35. The only requirement, as per the terms of the Clause No. VIII of the
TDA for completion of the successful development of technology, is
the certification of the AMC and acceptance of the same by TIFAC.
The decision of the AMC, being the competent authority to declare the
project to be successful, is binding on the parties in terms of the said
Clause of the TDA.
36. It is also pertinent to note that as per Clause No. VIII itself, before
TIFAC arrives on the decision that the project is successful, the views
37. The 6th AMC meeting dated 21.10.2002 records that the cheques were
submitted to TIFAC in the meeting so as to ensure the repayment as per
the terms of the TDA, more specifically Clause No. IX. The minutes of
the AMC meeting read as under:
“Advanced Composites Programme
Sixth Advisory & Monitoring Committee meeting for
project on 'Composite CNG Cylinders for Automobiles'
Date: October 21, 2002
Venue: Strategic Engineering Pvt. Ltd. (SEPL),
Manamadurai
The list of the Advisory & Monitoring Committee (AMC)
members and other participants is given as Annexure-1.
At the outset, Mr. GS Viswanath, Managing
Director-SEPL welcomed all the AMC members and
informed that CNG cylinder (Type 2-steel liners hoop
wrapped with FRP) for cars had been successfully developed
and tested for hydrostatic test, leak test, burst test, pressure
cycle test etc. as mentioned in the last AMC meeting. The
cylinder was subsequently tested successfully for bonfire test
by the US agency accredited by the Department of
Transportation (DOT), US Federal Govt. as per their
specifications.
Mr. Viswanath further informed that SEPL planned to
with FRP) for Samtel International Inc., California, USA and
Pressed Steel Tank Co., Inc of USA based on steel liners
sourced from USA as per the specs provided by them. The
Companies agreed to supply the steel liners for the cylinders.
The cylinders would be marketed by the US Companies in
East Europe, south-east Asia & Australia. SEPL would also
proceed with getting the cylinders tested as per newly
finalized ISO standards. Exporting to US Companies and
conformity to ISO standards would further help SEPL to get
the cylinders subsequently approved by Chief Controller of
Explosives (Govt. of India), Nagpur for introducing FRP
CNG cylinders to Indian market.
With the aforesaid action plan, SEPL placed an order for
the procurement of 3-axis filament winding system from
Entec, USA for the production of FRP CNG cylinders in as
early as October 2000. The last instalment of advance
payment to Entec was made in March 2001 after the release
of last and final TDA instalment of Rs.185 lakhs from TIFAC
in November 2000. The 3-axis system was expected to be
delivered by early May 2001. Mr. Viswanath informed the
Committee that the despatch of the filament winding system
was delayed considerably due to the protracted clearance
from the Federal Department of Commerce, US Govt. SEPL
had to engage a lawyer for representation to US Govt. After a
lot of deliberations and detailed assessment of SEPL by Dun
had recently been cleared by the US Govt. and the system
would be shipped shortly. SEPL was confident of starting the
commercial production of FRP CNG cylinder by February
2003.
The prototype cylinders fabricated on Entec's 2-axis
machine were tested successfully as per the DOT
specifications. Hence, SEPL wanted to procure 3-axis system
from Entec for better confidence among US Companies for
sourcing hoop wrapped cylinders from SEPL.
Mr. Balakrishnan remarked that Ashok Leyland was
looking for a bigger diameter CNG cylinder (450 mm dia.)
for buses. This would help in the reduction of cost towards
fitting of three cylinders as well as providing
inter-connectors.
The Committee advised SEPL for ensuring the earliest
possible delivery of 3-axis filament winding system, its
installation and commissioning. The procurement of liners
should also be taken up simultaneously.
Mr. Biswas remarked that a visit would be called
sometime in February 2003 after the commissioning of 3-axis
filament winding system for witnessing the commercial
production of FRP CNG cylinders.
As per the tripartite agreement, SEPL was required to
repay TDA to TIFAC commencing in January 2003. A total
amount of Rs.336 lakhs would be reimbursed by SEPL as per
been an inordinate delay in the shipment of 3-axis filament
winding machine due to export license formalities by US
Govt., SEPL would be in a position to manufacture & supply
composite CNG cylinders commercially starting from
February 2003.
On request from SEPL, AMC agreed to accept TDA
repayment for the first year in four instalments @ Rs. 16.80
lakhs starting from January 2003. The subsequent
instalments @ Rs 33.60 lakhs for the balance four years
would be paid half-yearly. Accordingly, SEPL submitted 12
post-dated cheques for the aforesaid TDA repayment.”
38. SEPL never objected to the said finding of AMC in the 5th and 6th
meeting. The Arbitrator also supported the said contention and
recorded a finding which reads as under:
“AMC had six meetings. In the 5thmeeting, the technology
development was declared "successful". SEPL did not object
to the decision in the 5th meeting itself, did not send any
communication objecting to the decision after the meeting,
or, did not raise the issue in the 6th meeting. Therefore, the
decision regarding success of the project taken in the 5th
meeting of the AMC may be taken as confirmed.
....
Given the Situation, Arbitrator observes the following:
• For reasons best known to them, the AMC declared the
project "successful" in its 5th meeting.
is the final authority to assess whether a project is successful.
AMC declared "success" in its 5th Meeting. This was duly
recorded in the minutes of the said meeting. Chairperson
AMC Prof Lakkad had also confirmed the same on two
occasions he participated in the instant arbitration
proceedings.
• After declaration of success, SEPL had not gone on record
to appeal to AMC to revisit the decision taken by AMC.
• Therefore, Arbitrator is left with no other alternative but to
respect the declaration of “success” by AMC.
• However, the action of AMC/TIFAC as recorded in the
same 5th meeting minutes is confusing. Through this AMC
directed TIFAC to release funds for the most significant
piece of equipment: 3-axis filament winding machine for the
project.
• Arbitrator questions the logic of said action after declaring
success of the project
• TIFAC stated that this was done to facilitate SEPL to do
commercial operations. Arbitrator does not accept this
explanation given by TIFAC since TIFAC is not afinancial
institution in the business of providing financial support for
setting up a commercial entity.
• Even if it were so, there is no evidence to show that the
project had ever reached the large - scale production
/commercial stage. Based only on positive results of
development is complete; the product is to be tested for
market acceptance by end-users.
• Therefore, declaration of "success" did not imply
declaration of "conclusion" or "end" of the project.
Arbitrator finds the "hurry" in declaring "success" baffling.”
(emphasis supplied)
39. Three things emerge from the above:
a. The recitals reproduced above as well as definition in the TDA show
that the aim of the project, amongst others, is to achieve commercial
viability of the technology developed.
b. The word “technology” is not defined in the TDA.
c. The final authority as per the terms of Clause VII to determine
whether the development of technology is successful or not, is the
AMC.
40. Upon perusal of the detailed technical description of the activities to be
carried out in the project, as given under the TIFAC project proposal
under TPMM on advanced composites, it can be established that the
project was divided into 5 stages being consolidation of design
literature and data to determine various parameters, analysis of the data
consolidated, fabrication of sample cylinders, testing of the equipment
and lastly, commercial production. The same is reproduced as below:
“4. DETAILED TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE
ACTIVITIES: A WRITE-UP WITH RESPECT TO
OBJECTIVES AND MAJOR TARGETS
Design literature and data on Pressure Vessel design &
analysis, already gathered by MIT and SEPL will be
consolidated, analysed and final design parameters like
diameter, thickness & length will be decided based on market
demand and usage.
STAGE II-ANALYSIS BY MIT:
Based on the parameters decided in the design phase,
analysis will be carried out for the given internal pressure
using Finite Element Methods. Standard packages like
CSA-NASTRAN, SOLID MODELLING will be used for the
analysis. The optimum fibre orientation, lay-up sequence and
cylinder geometry will be determined.
STAGE 111-FABRICATION AT NAL, BANGALORE
Polar filament winding machine at NAL is suitable to
fabricate sample cylinders. The facilities at NAL will be hired
for fabrication of 50 prototype cylinders designed by MIT. 30
aluminium liners will be imported and 20 steel liners will be
procured locally.
STAGE IV-TESTING AT SEPL'S SITE AT MANAMADURAI
Critical equipment to carry out acceptance test as per
international standard will be installed. The prototype
cylinders fabricated at NAL will be tested as per standards
and norms of DoT, USA, TUV, Germany and HSE, UK to
arrive at the ideal prototype of the CNG refill cylinder for
commercial production.
Install complete plant and machinery for commercial
production at SEPL's site at Manamadurai and produce
stipulated batches of cylinders for acceptance test as per
international standards...”
41. Even though the completion of aim of the Project depends on
commercialisation of the same, the “development of technology” is not
dependent upon the same. Development of the technology is a separate
stage, prior to, the commercial production. Once the AMC has declared
the development of technology as successful in terms of the Clause VIII
of the TDA, the repayment becomes due to the TIFAC in terms of
Clause IX of the TDA.
42. The contention of SEPL that the AMC could not have been treated as a
final authority to decide the successful completion of development of
technology, to my mind does not hold merit. Upon perusal of the terms
of the TDA above, more specifically Clause VIII, it is clear that it was
the AMC that had the sole jurisdiction to certify whether the
development of technology was a success or not. The same was decided
in favour of TIFAC in the 5th AMC meeting and never challenged by
SPEL.
43. Moreover, SPEL submitted the cheques which were for the repayment
in terms of Clause IX of the TDA. The same is evident from the
findings of the AMC in the 6th meeting. It was clearly noted by the
AMC that SEPL would be able to supply the composite cylinders
commercially only from February 2003 but the repayment had to begin
from January 2003. In furtherance of the said findings, SEPL submitted
and 6th meeting rather submitted the cheques. It was by conduct that
SEPL has acquiesced to the same.
44. As per the list of machinery given in the TIFAC project proposal under
TPMM on advanced composites, the machine was an important part of
completion of project, but the same cannot be seen in isolation. The
conjoint reading of the minutes of the meeting and the terms of the
TDA and proposal, it is evident that the technology had been developed
and the said machinery was important for the commercialisation of the
cylinders.
45. The Arbitrator has totally ignored Clause IX. The 5 stages of the Project
as stated in the detailed technical description, can be bifurcated into 3
parts. Firstly, development of technology, secondly, testing and thirdly,
commercialisation. Clause IX has mandated repayment to be made at
the stage to the technology being declared as successful by the AMC.
Commercialisation may not have been achieved but mandate of Clause
IX has squarely been achieved. The technology has been declared
successful by AMC on the statement of Mr. Vishwanath, Managing
director of SEPL. The Arbitrator, by holding that commercialisation
has not been achieved hence no payment is to be made has totally
ignored the ambit and scope of Clause IX of the TDA.
46. In view of the above analysis, I am of the considered opinion that, the
finding of the Arbitrator that the development of technology is not
successful until the commercial viability is achieved is contrary to the
specific terms of the TDA. The interpretation that the repayment
obligation becomes due only when the commercialisation of the project
TDA.
47. No doubt the Arbitrator has the power to interpret the terms and
conditions of the contract, but, the Arbitrator being the creature of the
contract, does not have the power to substitute, supplement, alter or
modify the terms of the contract. It is the solemn responsibility of the
Arbitrator to adjudicate and decide the disputes while staying in the
circumscribing limits of the provisions of the contract between the
parties while also upholding the terms of the contract. Reliance is
placed on Sepco Electric Power Construction Corpn. v. Kamalanga
Energy Ltd.5 The relevant paragraphs read as under:
“91. Numerous precedents laid down by this Court have
often emphasised that an arbitrator lacks the power to
deviate from or to reinterpret the terms of the contract while
making an award. The awards must be within the parameters
of the agreement entered between the parties.
92. This Court in Saw Pipes (supra) has reiterated that any
deviation from the mandate of Section 28 Sub-Section 3 of the
1996 Act is a valid ground for lambasting an arbitral award.
Commenting on the duty of the arbitrators, this Court
observed as follows:
“73. It is to be reiterated that it is the primary duty of
the arbitrators to enforce a promise which the parties
have made and to uphold the sanctity of the contract
which forms the basis of the civilized society and also
the jurisdiction of the arbitrators. Hence, this part of the
award passed by the Arbitral Tribunal granting interest
on the amount deducted by the appellant from the bills
payable to the respondent is against the terms of the
contract and is, therefore, violative of Section 28(3) of
the Act.”
....
94. Further clarification of this proposition is brought about
through observations of this Court in a further decision by
3-Judge Bench in Union of India v. Bharat Enterprise
wherein it was underlined that the existence and powers of an
arbitrator are a creature of the agreement between the
parties, and it is the terms of the contract which serves as a
fundamental basis for the procedure to be adopted by the
arbitral tribunal. Therefore, the concerned arbitrator is
restricted to the terms of the contract thereof and cannot go
outside its scope or what is, per se, specified. In words of the
Bench, “A disregard of the specific provisions of the contract
would incur wrath of the Award being imperiled. This
position cannot be in the region of dispute.”
48. As per Section 34 (2A) of the 1996 Act, the Award can be set aside if
the Award is vitiated by patent illegality. An Award contrary to the
terms of the contract falls within the preview of patent illegality.
49. A bare perusal of the above discussion clearly brings out the following:
i. Under the TDA the Arbitrator the could not sit in Appeal over the
decision of the AMC. The AMC was the competent authority to
not.
ii. The project was for successful development of technology for
composite refill cylinders for compressed natural gas.
Commercialisation was an incidence of successful development of
technology.
iii. The contract aimed at commercial viability of the project for
which the machine was an important requirement.
iv. The repayment obligation of SEPL in terms of Clause IX
commenced from the date of declaration of successful
development of technology.
50. Hence, it would be apposite to conclude that the Award is vitiated by
patent illegality. The Arbitrator has gone behind the terms of the TDA
and rewritten the contract. Reliance is placed on PSA Sical Terminals
(P) Ltd. v. V.O. Chidambranar Port Trust6, wherein it was held that
the Award is liable to be set aside on the ground of patent illegality if
the Arbitrator has rewritten the terms of the contract. The relevant
paragraphs read as under:
85. As such, as held by this Court in Ssangyong Engg. &
Construction Co. Ltd. [(2019) 15 SCC 131: (2020) 2 SCC
(Civ) 213], the fundamental principle of justice has been
breached, namely, that a unilateral addition or alteration of
a contract has been foisted upon an unwilling party. This
Court has further held that a party to the agreement cannot
be made liable to perform something for which it has not
entered into a contract. In our view, rewriting a contract for
the parties would be breach of fundamental principles of
justice entitling a court to interfere since such case would be
one which shocks the conscience of the court and as such,
would fall in the exceptional category.
86. We may gainfully refer to the following observations of
this Court in Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. Annapurna
Construction [(2003) 8 SCC 154]: (SCC pp. 161-62, para
22)
“22. There lies a clear distinction between an error
within the jurisdiction and error in excess of
jurisdiction. Thus, the role of the arbitrator is to
arbitrate within the terms of the contract. He has no
power apart from what the parties have given him under
the contract. If he has travelled beyond the contract, he
would be acting without jurisdiction, whereas if he has
remained inside the parameters of the contract, his
award cannot be questioned on the ground that it
contains an error apparent on the face of the record.”
87. It has been held that the role of the arbitrator is to
arbitrate within the terms of the contract. He has no power
apart from what the parties have given him under the
contract. If he has travelled beyond the contract, he would be
acting without jurisdiction.
89. It has been held that an Arbitral Tribunal is not a court of
law. Its orders are not judicial orders. Its functions are not
justitiae. It has been held that the jurisdiction of the
arbitrator being confined to the four corners of the
agreement, he can only pass such an order which may be the
subject-matter of reference.
90. In that view of the matter, we are of the considered view,
that the impugned award would come under the realm of
“patent illegality” and therefore, has been rightly set aside
by the High Court.”
51. The various directions to make payments by TIFAC and SEPL are
based out of a common finding that the Project had not achieved
success as the technology was not commercialised and hence no
repayment is required to be made. In view of my discussion above, the
said finding is patently illegal as it is contrary to the terms of the TDA.
All the other findings given by the Arbitrator are interconnected and not
severable in nature. Hence, the Award is set aside.
SEPL’S Challenge to the Award (O.M.P (COMM) 128 /2021)
52. Though in the prayer, SEPL challenged finding Nos. 3,4, and 6, in the
arguments, the challenge was restricted to finding No. 6, which reads as
under:
“6. SEPL could have utilized plant and machineries acquired
under the project to manufacture some products of their own
business interest and thereby contributing to the national
economy as well. They did not do so. SEPL is asked to pay
back 10% of Rs 280 lakhs of tax-payers money (channelized
through TIFAC) that is Rs 28 lakhs to TIFAC in two
53. Since the Award itself is set aside, the finding No. 6 also is set aside and
O.M.P. (COMM.) 128 of 2021 becomes infructuous.
CONCLUSION
54. Consequently, the petitions are allowed and Arbitral Award dated
14.12.2019 is set aside.
55. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
JASMEET SINGH, J
DECEMBER 20th , 2025/(MU)