COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: OMP (ENF.) (COMM.) 68/2023 & EX.APPL.(OS) 1123/2023
DATE: 6th January, 2026
PLAINTIFF: RCCIVL-LITL (JV)
DEFENDANT: UNION OF INDIA
JUDGE: Justice AMIT BANSAL

----JUDGMENT-----

The present petition has been filed under Section 36 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act (‘Act’) seeking enforcement of the final award dated
7
th November, 2022 (‘Award’) passed by an Arbitral Tribunal comprising a
Sole Arbitrator (‘Arbitral Tribunal’).
2. RCCIVL-LITL (JV), the claimant in the arbitration proceedings, is
hereinafter referred to as the ‘decree holder’ and the Union of India, the
respondent in the arbitration proceedings, is hereinafter referred to as the
‘judgment debtor’.
3. The Arbitral Tribunal allowed certain claims of the decree holder
along with interest and costs of arbitration. The counter claims filed by the
respondent were rejected by the Arbitral Tribunal.
4. The judgment debtor filed a petition under Section 34 of the Act
seeking setting aside of the Award, which was dismissed on 29th May, 2023.
An appeal filed against the said dismissal order under Section 37 of the Act
was also dismissed by the Division Bench on 8th July, 2024. Subsequently,
an SLP filed by the judgment debtor was also dismissed on 20th December,
2024. Therefore, the Award has attained finality.
5. The judgment debtor deposited a sum of ₹17,79,65,167.54 with the
Registrar General of this Court on 7th February, 2024, which has since been
released in the favour of decree holder.
6. The decree holder claims that it is entitled to sums beyond the
deposited amount before this Court whereas judgment debtor opposes the
same. In these circumstances, both sides were directed to file their respective
calculation details.
7. This Court vide order dated 9th July, 2025 directed that the
discrepancies in the calculation table be mutually reconciled by the officials
of the parties. However, the differences with regard to the calculation details
could not be reconciled. At the hearing on 11th November, 2025, it was noted
that the disputes between the parties only persist in respect of claim no.
2(K), claim no.2(L), claim no.2(O), claim no.2(N) and the future interest.
8. Submissions on behalf of counsel were heard on 9th December, 2023
and the judgment was reserved.
9. At first, I will consider the differences between the parties in relation
to claim nos.2(K) and 2(L). For the ease of reference, the said claims are set
out below:-
“Claim No. 2 (K): Ser No 11 of “Disputed” part of Final Bill:
Reimbursement of compensation on Short/ Less payment of RARs amount
amounting to Rs.5,77,19,935.40
Claim No. 2 (L): Ser No 12 of “Disputed” part of Final Bill:
Reimbursement of compensation on delayed payment of RARs amounting
to Rs 3,24,69,263.12”
10. In respect of the aforesaid claims, the Arbitral Tribunal held that the
claimant (decree holder) did not bring any evidence to prove that it had
actually suffered any losses. However, it was noted that there was
unjustifiable delay in payments and therefore, the decree holder would be
entitled to interest.
11. Accordingly, the Arbitral Tribunal awarded interest at the rate of 8%
on the delayed payments. The operative paragraph 144 of the Award is set
out below:-
“144. It is noted that except for the calculations referred to in Appendix
‘A’, the Claimant has not brought on record any evidence to prove that it
had actually suffered any losses to be entitled to justify its claims under
Section 73 of the Contract Act. However, unjustifiably delayed payments
which have already fallen due would attract grant of interest. Since the
Respondent has not led any evidence to show that the payments were
made on time or were delayed for a genuine reason, the Tribunal
considers it just to grant compensation by way of interest. The Claimant
has claimed interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum on which its
calculations are based. The Tribunal is of the view that 8 percent
interest on the delayed payments would be just and reasonable. It is so
awarded. The Claimant will recalculate its claim accordingly.”
[emphasis supplied]
12. Next, a reference may be made to claim 2(O) which is set out below:-
“Claim No. 2 (O): Ser No 15 of “Disputed” part of Final Bill:
Reimbursement of Extra recovery of VAT at source amounting to Rs
6,73,77,744.84 (Amended to Rs 1,79,09,829.49)”
13. In relation to the aforesaid claim, the Arbitral Tribunal granted interest
on the extra deduction of VAT effected by the respondent (judgment debtor)
at the rate of 8% per annum. The dispositive paragraph 170 of the Award is
set out below:
170. The Claimant has claimed 18% interest on the additional recovery
made by the Respondent. The Respondent's contention that the interest, if
any, ought to be claimed from the concerned Authorities is devoid of any
merit. The Respondent was aware of the elucidatory judgment passed by
the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana. Therefore, the conduct of
the Respondent in effecting recovery of VAT at 6 percent was not correct.
The Tribunal appreciates that the excess deduction has not gone into the
coffers of the Respondent. However, the judgment of the Hon'ble Punjab
& Haryana High Court had already clarified the position prior to the
Respondent making this deduction. It must therefore be burdened with the
losses which inexorably were suffered by the Claimant. It is also noted
that the Respondent has not challenged the assertion of the Claimant that
it suffered losses. In any event, the suffering of losses is self-evident. In
the facts and circumstances of this case, the Tribunal considers it
appropriate to grant interest on the extra deduction of VAT effected by
the Respondent (i.e. 6% minus 3.5% = 2.5%) at the rate of 8 percent per
annum instead of 18 percent claimed by the Claimant.”
[emphasis supplied]
14. In respect of claim no.3, ‘Interest Past, Pendente Lite and Future’, the
Arbitral Tribunal returned the following findings:-
“194. The Claimant has been awarded appropriate interest while
deciding the individual claims. Any other claim qua interest (past and
pendente-lite) stands rejected.
15. The ‘Relief’ section of the Award (paragraph 203) details the amounts
awarded by the Arbitral Tribunal in respect of each of the individual claims.
The relevant extracts in respect of claim nos.2(K), 2(L) and 2(O) are set out
below:-
Claim No. Brief description of
claim
Amount Claimed
(In INR)
Awarded amount (In
INR)
2K Ser No 11 of
“Disputed” part of
Final Bill:
Reimbursement of
compensation on
Short/ Less payment
of RARs
5,77,19,935.40/- The Claimant is
granted 8 percent
interest on the
delayed payments.
2L Ser No 12 of 3,24,69,263.12/- The Claimant is
“Disputed” part of
Final Bill:
Reimbursement of
compensation on
delayed payment of
RARs
granted 8 percent
interest on the
delayed payments.
2O Ser No 15 of
“Disputed” part of
Final Bill:
Reimbursement of
Extra recovery of
VAT at source
1,79,09,829.49 The Claimant is
awarded interest on
the extra deduction
of VAT effected by
the Respondent (i.e.
6% minus 3.5% =
2.5%) at the rate of
8 percent per annum
instead of 18 percent
claimed by the
Claimant.”
16. There is no difference between the parties as regards the
quantification of the amounts awarded under the aforesaid claims 2(K), 2(L)
and 2(O) which are as follows:-
Claim No. Amount Awarded
2(K) Rs. 3,07,83,965.54
2(L) Rs. 1,73,16,940.33
2(O) Rs. 79,59,924.22
17. The decree holder claims pendente lite interest on the amounts
awarded under claim nos.2(K), 2(L) and 2(O), whereas it is the contention of
the judgment debtor that in terms of the Award no pendente lite interest has
been awarded in respect of aforesaid claims.
18. A perusal of paragraph 194 of the Award set out above, clearly
indicates that the Arbitral Tribunal has awarded interest in respect of some
of the individual claims and any other claim qua interest whether past or
pendente lite has been rejected in light of paragraph 194.
19. A reading of paragraphs 144 and 170 of the Award along with the
paragraph 203 (‘Relief’) makes it clear that the Arbitral Tribunal, in respect
of the aforesaid claim nos. 2(K), 2(L) and 2(O), has awarded 8% interest on
the delayed payments. Pertinently, the Arbitral Tribunal has not awarded any
pendente lite interest. This is in contradistinction with some of other claims,
such as claim no. 2(A), claim no.2(C), claim no.2(E), claim no.2(F), claim
no.2(G) and claim no.2(H), where the Arbitral Tribunal has specifically
awarded pendente lite interest. Illustratively, a reference may be made to
paragraph 203 in relation of claim no. 2(A) and 2(E), where specifically
pendente lite interest has been awarded, as referred to below:-
Claim No. Brief description of
claim
Amount Claimed
(In INR)
Awarded amount (In
INR)
2A SerNo 1 of
“Disputed” part of
the Final Bill:
Reimbursement extra
expenditure on
account of change in
location of site office,
site store and labour
camps
2,61,21,111.10/- 1,00,00,000/-
with interest at the
rate of 8 percent per
annum from 26th
August 2019 to 7th

November 2022.
2E 4,86,787.97/- 4,86,787.97/-
with interest at the
rate of 8 percent per
annum from 26th
August 2019 to 7th
November 2022.
[emphasis supplied]
20. Therefore, in terms of the Award, no pendente lite interest has been
awarded in respect of claim nos. 2(K), 2(L) and 2(O).
21. Now, I will consider the differences with regard to claim no.2(N). For
ease of reference, claim no.2(N) is set out below:-
“Claim No. 2 (N): Ser No 14 of "Disputed" part of Final Bill:
Reimbursement of extra expenditure incurred on extension of BGs
amounting to Rs.1,74,14,257.50”
22. The Arbitral Tribunal held that the decree holder is entitled to recover
the actual cost incurred in keeping the bank guarantees alive. The relevant
extract from the relief granted in relation to claim 2(N) is set out below:-
Claim No. Brief description of
claim
Amount Claimed
(In INR)
Awarded amount (In
INR)
2N Ser No 14 of
“Disputed” part of
Final Bill:
Reimbursement of
extra expenditure
incurred on extension
of BGs
1,74,14,257.50 The Claimant is
awarded the actual
costs incurred by it in
keeping the Bank
Guarantees alive.
23. A perusal of the aforesaid extract from the Award would show that the
Arbitral Tribunal has not quantified the amount of cost of keeping the bank
guarantees alive that was granted in favour of decree holder. Neither has the
Arbitral Tribunal awarded any pendente lite interest in respect of the
aforesaid claim, as was the case in respect of claim nos. 2(K), 2(L) and 2(O).
24. Whereas the decree holder claims a sum of ₹2,83,96,120/- towards the
cost of keeping the bank guarantees alive, as per the judgment debtor the
amount due is ₹84,80,594/-.
25. The judgment debtor called upon the decree holder to furnish
documentary evidence in respect of the actual cost incurred by the decree
holder in keeping the bank guarantees alive vide letter dated 7th October,
2025.
26. The undisputed amount of ₹84,80,594/- has already been paid by the
judgment debtor to the decree holder. It is further stated on behalf of the
judgment debtor in the aforesaid letter dated 7th October, 2025 that it is
willing to pay any further sum to the decree holder upon the decree holder
furnishing proof of actual amount incurred by the decree holder if any.
27. Therefore, at this stage, no additional amounts are payable by
judgment debtor to the decree holder under claim no 2(N). However, the
judgment debtor shall remain bound by the statement made above. Further,
in terms of the Award, no pendente lite interest has been granted in respect
of claim no.2(N).
28. Yet another difference between the parties is with regard to the fact on
what components of the Award would future interest be payable.
29. It is the contention of the decree holder that future interest would be
payable on the entire amounts awarded, whereas the judgment debtor
contends that future interest would be payable only on the claims that were
granted i.e. ₹8,26,97,491/-.
30. Counsel for the judgment debtor submits that from a reading of
paragraph 204 of the Award, it can be seen that the Arbitral Tribunal has
granted future interest at the rate of 10.5% per annum “on the claims
granted”. Therefore, future interest is payable only on the total amount of
Rs.8,26,97,491/-.
31. I am unable to accept the aforesaid submission of the judgment
debtor. In terms of paragraph 204 of the Award, future interest of 10.5 % has
been awarded on “all the claims granted”. The claims granted are
individually detailed in paragraph 203 of the Award. While some of the
claims have been quantified in the paragraph 203 of the Award, the
remaining claims such as claim nos. 2(K), 2(L), 2(N) and 2(O) have not
been quantified. In the calculation sheet filed on behalf of judgment debtor
and the decree holder, there is no dispute with regard to quantum awarded
under claim nos. 2(K), 2(L) and 2(O) as also the costs of arbitration.
32. As noted above, in respect of some of the claims, the Arbitral Tribunal
has awarded pendente lite interests at rate of 8% per annum from 26th
August, 2019 to 7th November, 2022. However, in respect of claim nos.
2(K), 2(L), 2(N) and 2(O), pendente lite interest has not been awarded.
33. At this stage, it may be relevant to refer to Section 31(7) of the Act
which provides for award of interest in an arbitral award. The same is set out
below for the sake of convenience:
“31. Form and contents of arbitral award. –
(7) (a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far as an
arbitral award is for the payment of money, the arbitral tribunal may
include in the sum for which the award is made interest, at such rate as it
deems reasonable, on the whole or any part of the money, for the whole
or any part of the period between the date on which the cause of action
arose and the date on which the award is made.
(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless the
award otherwise directs, carry interest at the rate of two per cent higher
than the current rate of interest prevalent on the date of award, from the
date of award to the date of payment.”
[emphasis supplied]
34. A reference may be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in In
Hyder Consulting (UK) Limited v. Governor, State of Orissa1
(Hyder
Consulting). The relevant observations made by the Supreme Court in
Hyder Consulting (supra) are set out below:
“4. Clause (a) of sub-section (7) provides that where an award is made for
the payment of money, the Arbitral Tribunal may include interest in the
sum for which the award is made. In plain terms, this provision confers a
power upon the Arbitral Tribunal while making an award for payment of
money, to include interest in the sum for which the award is made on either
the whole or any part of the money and for the whole or any part of the
period for the entire pre-award period between the date on which the
cause of action arose and the date on which the award is made. To put it
differently, sub-section (7)(a) contemplates that an award, inclusive of
1
(2015) 2 SCC 189.
interest for the pre-award period on the entire amount directed to be paid
or part thereof, may be passed. The “sum” awarded may be the principal
amount and such interest as the Arbitral Tribunal deems fit. If no
interest is awarded, the “sum” comprises only the principal. The
significant words occurring in clause (a) of sub-section (7) of Section 31 of
the Act are “the sum for which the award is made”. On a plain reading,
this expression refers to the total amount or sum for the payment for which
the award is made. Parliament has not added a qualification like
“principal” to the word “sum”, and therefore, the word “sum” here
simply means “a particular amount of money”. In Section 31(7), this
particular amount of money may include interest from the date of cause of
action to the date of the award.
*** *** ***
7. Thus, when used as a noun, as it seems to have been used in this
provision, the word “sum” simply means “an amount of money”; whatever
it may include — “principal” and “interest” or one of the two. Once the
meaning of the word “sum” is clear, the same meaning must be ascribed
to the word in clause (b) of sub-section (7) of Section 31 of the Act,
where it provides that a sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award
“shall … carry interest …” from the date of the award to the date of the
payment i.e. post-award. In other words, what clause (b) of subsection (7)
of Section 31 of the Act directs is that the “sum”, which is directed to be
paid by the award, whether inclusive or exclusive of interest, shall carry
interest at the rate of eighteen per cent per annum for the post-award
period, unless otherwise ordered.
8. Thus, sub-section (7) of Section 31 of the Act provides, firstly, vide
clause (a) that the Arbitral Tribunal may include interest while making
an award for payment of money in the sum for which the award is made
and further, vide clause (b) that the sum so directed to be made by the
award shall carry interest at a certain rate for the post-award period.”
[emphasis supplied]
35. In light of the above, all the amounts that have been awarded by the
Arbitral Tribunal including the claims which have not been specifically
quantified in the Award such as claim nos. 2(K), 2(L), 2(N) and 2(O), would
be ‘sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award’ in terms of section
31(7)(b) of the Act and would have to be included for the purposes of
calculating future interest. Similarly, wherever pendente lite interest has
been awarded, the same would be included for the purposes of calculating
future interest.
36. In respect of claims granted under claim nos.2(K), 2(L), 2(O) and
2(N) even though the decree holder is not entitled to pendente lite interest,
the decree holder would be entitled to future interest at the rate of 10.5% per
annum.
37. The next point of difference between the parties is with regard to the
date from which the future interest would run. In this regard reference may
be made to paragraph 204 of the Award which is set out below:-
“204. The Claimant is granted a total amount of Rs. 8,26,97,491/- (Eight
Crores Twenty-Six Lacs Ninety-Seven Thousand Four Hundred Ninety
One only) along with interest granted under the respective heads and the
cost of litigation and arbitration which shall be payable by the
Respondent to the Claimant, within a period of two (2) months from the
day following the date of Award, failing which the Claimant is granted an
interest at the rate of 10.5 percent per annum (on the claims granted) for
the period from the day following the date of the Award till realization”
38. It is the contention of the decree holder that the future interest at the
rate of 10.5% per annum would run from 8th November, 2022 to 7
th
February, 2024 the date on which the amount was deposited by the judgment
debtor in Court, whereas it is the contention of the judgment debtor that the
future interest would run from 24th January, 2023 to 7
th February, 2024.
39. The reading of the aforesaid extract from paragraph 204 the Award
makes it abundantly clear that the respondent/judgment debtor was granted
a period of two months form the date of award, i.e. 7
th November, 2022 to
make the due payments and it was further provided that if the judgment
debtor fails to make the due payments under the Award within two months,
the claimant would be entitled to interest at the rate of 10.5% per annum
from the day following the date of Award till date of realisation. Had the
judgment debtor paid the awarded amount within two months, there would
have been no future interest. However, since the judgment debtor did not
pay the awarded amount within the two months granted, the future interest
would be payable from 8th November, 2022.
40. Based on the above, the judgment debtor shall file its revised
calculation of the amounts due to the decree holder within four weeks from
today. Further, the amounts due to the decree holder in terms of the revised
calculation shall be paid within six weeks from today.
41. The present enforcement petition is disposed of in light of the
discussion above.
42. All pending applications stand disposed of.