COURT: Commercial Court, Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: W.P.(C) 10431/2020 & CM APPL. 33016/2020
DATE: 9th January, 2026 
PLAINTIFF: TATA STEEL LIMITED 
DEFENDANT: MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS, THROUGH SECRETARY & ANR
JUDGE: Justice AMIT SHARMA

----JUDGMENT-----

The present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
India, 1950, seeks the following prayers: -
“1. To issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature
of Mandamus to the First Respondent, i.e. Ministry of Corporate
Affairs, being the supervisory ministry in the implementation of
IBC, to provide clarification to the questions of law raised in the
present Writ Petition qua the IBC and confirm/declare that the
approved Resolution Plan is binding on all creditors of the
Petitioner, including the Second Respondent herein;
2. To issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature
of Certiorari setting aside the Order dated October 07.2020 passed
by the Arbitral Tribunal;
3. To issue an appropriate writ, order or direction in the nature
of Mandamus directing the Arbitral Tribunal to terminate the
arbitration proceedings in Arbitration-I/Matter of 2009 and
Arbitration II/Matter of 2006 as there being no cause of action
surviving in favour of the Second Respondent and alleged claim of
the Second Respondent having been extinguished abated and
withdrawn;
4. To issue any other suitable writ, order or direction which the
Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the circumstances of the
case;
5. To award cost of this writ petition to the Petitioner.”
2. Relevant facts, as stated by the Petitioner, necessary for adjudication of
the present petition are as under: -
i. Tata Steel Limited, being the successor-in-interest of Angul Energy
Limited (formerly known as Bhushan Energy Limited) (hereinafter
referred to as the “Petitioner”) has preferred the present petition for the
purposes of setting aside of the impugned order dated 07.10.2020
(hereinafter referred to as the “Impugned Order”), passed by the
Learned Arbitral Tribunal, on an application preferred on behalf of the
Petitioner (Respondent/Applicant therein), under Section 32(2)(c) read
with Section 16 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
(hereinafter referred to as the “Arbitration Act”) seeking termination
of the Arbitral proceedings on the ground that the Resolution Plan
dated 11.06.2018 extinguishes the claim filed against the Petitioner in
the said proceedings;
ii. The Petitioner was incorporated under the provisions of the Companies
Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the “Companies Act”) and is an
unlisted public limited company within the meaning of the Companies
Act;
iii. On 09.06.2006, the Petitioner entered into the following contracts with
ISGEC Heavy Engineering Limited, i.e., Respondent No. 2, who is a
public listed company registered under the Companies Act: -
(a) Contract Ref. No. 8/BEL/09-10/039 dated 28.11.2009 for supply
of 2x425 TPH CFBC Boilers for a total value of Rs.178 Crores
excluding all taxes, duties and levies;
(b) Contract dated 09.06.2006 as amended on 12.03.2007 for supply
of 4x250TPH CFBC Boilers for a total value of Rs. 175.10
crores excluding all taxes, duties and levies;
(c) Work Order Ref. No. 8/BEL/09-10/041 dated 21.12.2009 for
Erection and Commissioning of the 2x425 TPH CFBC Boilers
for a total value of Rs. 30 Crores excluding all taxes, duties and
levies.
iv. On account of various disputes pertaining to non-performance of the
contractual obligations by the Petitioner, Respondent No. 2 initiated
Arbitral proceedings against the Petitioner before the learned Arbitral
Tribunal, comprising of Hon’ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) R.C. Lahoti,
Hon’ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) Vijendra Kumar Jain and Hon’ble Mr.
Justice (Retd.) Manmohan Sarin. The said Arbitral proceedings were
bifurcated by the learned Arbitral Tribunal into two separate
arbitrations, namely Arbitration-I/Matter of 2009 and ArbitrationII/Matter of 2006 and both the proceedings were conducted by the
learned Arbitral Tribunal simultaneously as the disputes between the
parties were interconnected and inter-dependent;
v. During the pendency of the Arbitral proceedings, Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process (hereinafter referred to as “CIRP”) under Section 7
of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to
as “IBC”) was initiated against the Petitioner by the State Bank of
India, on 22.11.2017 before the Adjudicating Authority, National
Company Law Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as “Adjudicating
Authority”) by way of a Company Petition bearing No. (IB)-
530(PB)/2017;
vi. The aforesaid petition was admitted by the Adjudicating Authority vide
order dated 08.01.2018, whereby a moratorium was imposed and an
Interim Resolution Professional (hereinafter referred to as the “IRP”)
was appointed to look after the affairs of the Petitioner in terms of
Section 13 of IBC;
vii. Subsequently, vide public announcement dated 10.01.2018, the IRP
invited claims from all the creditors of the Petitioner;
viii. In view thereof, Respondent No. 2 submitted its claim before the IRP
contending to be an Operational Creditor of the Petitioner, vide its
affidavit and Form-B dated 22.01.2018 for an amount of INR
80,29,27,121/- (INR Eighty Crores Twenty Nine Lakhs Twenty Seven
Thousand One Hundred and Twenty One Only);
ix. Subsequent thereof, the IRP vide e-mail dated 17.04.2018,
communicated Respondent No. 2 that the claim of the latter is pending
adjudication before the Learned Arbitral Tribunal and the said claim
cannot be considered to be a crystalised liability of the Petitioner and is
only a “contingent liability”. The said communication is reproduced as
under:
x. Subsequently, a List of Creditors for the Petitioner was prepared, and in
the said list, Respondent No. 2 was mentioned in List B titled as
Category: Operational Creditors other than Workmen and Employees,
whereby the claim of Respondent No. 2 was kept as “contingent” for
the time being;
xi. On 11.06.2018 a Resolution Plan came to be submitted by Tata Steel
Limited (hereinafter referred to as “TSL”) before the Resolution
Professional (hereinafter referred to as the “RP”);
xii. In response to the IRP’s e-mail dated 17.04.2018, Respondent No. 2,
vide its reply dated 06.06.2018, disputed the categorization of its claim
as contingent and asserted that the claim was not disputed and was
payable on account of non-payment of supplied goods and services.
The said communication is reproduced as under: -

xiii. Subsequently, the RP, vide letter dated 30.07.2018, reiterated that the
claim of Respondent No. 2 was disputed and uncrystallised, had been
categorized as a “contingent liability”, duly disclosed in the List of
Creditors, and that its treatment in the Resolution Plan would be
determined by the resolution applicant and the Committee of Creditors
(hereinafter referred to as “CoC”). The said communication is as under:
-
(emphasis supplied)
xiv. The Resolution Plan submitted by TSL was approved by 100% voting
by the CoC of the Petitioner, by virtue of the voting held on 15.09.2018
and 16.09.2018;
xv. Subsequent thereto, the RP preferred an application bearing CA No.
929(PB)/2018 under Section 30(6) and 31 of IBC read with Regulation
39 of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Insolvency
Resolution Process for Corporate Persons) Regulations, 2016
(hereinafter referred to as “Regulations, 2016”) praying for acceptance
of the aforesaid Resolution Plan. The said application was allowed by
the learned Adjudicating Authority vide its order dated 30.05.2019 and
the Resolution Plan was accepted;
xvi. On 01.06.2019 the new management took charge of the Petitioner after
successful completion of the CIRP;
xvii. On 27.02.2020 the name of the Petitioner was changed from “Bhushan
Energy Limited” to “Angul Energy Limited” and a fresh certificate of
incorporation was issued by the Registrar of Companies, Delhi. The
said certificate is reproduced as under: -
xviii. In view of completion of the Insolvency proceedings of the Petitioner
and upon lifting of the moratorium, Respondent No. 2 sent a
communication dated 19.06.2019 to the learned Arbitral Tribunal for
resuming the Arbitral proceedings;
xix. On 27.07.2019 the learned Arbitral Tribunal informed the parties that
since the mandate of the tribunal had expired, parties may seek
extension from the Court;
xx. Subsequently, the Respondent No. 2 preferred an O.M.P.(Misc.)
(Comm.) No. 305/2019 before this Court, in which an order dated
08.11.2019 was passed and mandate of the learned Arbitral Tribunal
was extended by this Court for a period of 9 months;
xxi. During the course of the Arbitral proceedings, two separate
applications were preferred on behalf of the Petitioner under Section
32(2)(c) of the Arbitration Act, in Arbitration-I/Matter of 2009 and
Arbitration-II/Matter of 2006 before the learned Arbitral Tribunal inter
alia praying for termination of the Arbitral proceedings, wherein the
impugned order was passed, and accordingly, the present petition was
preferred.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
3. Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Petitioner drew
attention of this Court to the impugned order and submitted that the same is
contrary to the terms of the approved Resolution Plan and the intent and
scheme of IBC. It was further submitted that the law is settled that the liability
of the corporate debtor stands frozen upon the approval of the Resolution Plan
and all claims which are not a part of the approved Resolution Plan stand
extinguished and the same cannot be recovered thereafter.
4. Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Petitioner further
placed reliance on the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Ghanashyam Mishra and Sons Private Limited through Authorized
Signatory v. Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Company Limited Through the
Director and Ors1
, and contended that once a Resolution Plan is approved
under Section 31 of the IBC, all claims stand frozen in terms of the
Resolution Plan and any claim not forming part thereof, stands extinguished.
The relevant portion of the judgment reads as under: -
“102. In the result, we answer the questions framed by us as under:
102.1. That once a resolution plan is duly approved by the
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (1) of Section 31, the
claims as provided in the resolution plan shall stand frozen and will
be binding on the Corporate Debtor and its employees, members,
creditors, including the Central Government, any State Government
or any local authority, guarantors and other stakeholders. On the
date of approval of resolution plan by the Adjudicating Authority,
all such claims, which are not a part of resolution plan, shall stand
extinguished and no person will be entitled to initiate or continue
any proceedings in respect to a claim, which is not part of the
resolution plan.
102.2. 2019 amendment to Section 31 of the I&B Code is
clarificatory and declaratory in nature and therefore will be
effective from the date on which I&B Code has come into effect.
102.3. Consequently, all the dues including the statutory dues owed
to the Central Government, any State Government or any local
authority, if not part of the resolution plan, shall stand extinguished
and no proceedings in respect of such dues for the period prior to
the date on which the Adjudicating Authority grants its approval
under Section 31 could be continued.”
5. It was further contended by the learned Senior Counsel that the
impugned order undermines the binding value of the approved Resolution
Plan and the law is well settled that a corporate debtor cannot be made to face
undecided claims after the approval of the Resolution Plan. It was further
submitted that if the impugned order is sustained, the effect of it will militate
1
 (2021 SCC Online SC 313)
against the entire insolvency resolution process undergone by the Petitioner.
6. Learned Senior Counsel drew the attention of this Court to Section
5(21) of the IBC, and submitted that the said provision defines “operational
debt” as a claim in respect of provision of the goods and services, including
employment, or a debt in respect of the dues arising under any law for the
time being in force and payable to the Central Government, any State
Government or any local authority. It was further submitted that the term
“claim”, as defined under Section 3(6) in the IBC, includes a right to
payment, whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed, matured,
unmatured, disputed, undisputed, secured or unsecured. The said provisions
are reproduced as under: -
“3. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
…(6) “claim” means—
(a) a right to payment, whether or not such right is reduced to
judgment, fixed, disputed, undisputed, legal, equitable, secured or
unsecured;
(b) right to remedy for breach of contract under any law for
the time being in force, if such breach gives rise to a right to
payment, whether or not such right is reduced to judgment, fixed,
matured, unmatured, disputed, undisputed, secured or unsecured;
*** *** ***
5. Definitions.— In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
…(21) “operational debt” means a claim in respect of the provision
of goods or services including employment or a debt in respect of
the 1 [payment] of dues arising under any law for the time being in
force and payable to the Central Government, any State
Government or any local authority;”
7. It was thus contended that a conjoint reading of Sections 5(21) and 3(6)
of the IBC clearly establishes that an operational debt includes all claims,
whether or not such claims are reduced to judgment, fixed, matured,
unmatured, disputed, undisputed secured or unsecured. All such claims shall
fall under the definition of “operational debt” and all or any person to whom
such disputed claims are owed, shall fall under the category of “operational
creditors”.
8. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the alleged claims of
Respondent No. 2, as being sought in the Arbitral Proceedings, were for
supply of goods and services, and further, since the alleged claims of
Respondent No. 2, which were under dispute in the Arbitral Proceedings, the
same fell under the definition of “claim” as defined under Section 3(6) of the
IBC, and therefore, the alleged claims of Respondent No. 2 were to be
considered as operational debt, which would make Respondent No. 2 an
operational creditor to the Petitioner.
9. It was further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that a conjoint
reading of Sections 5(20), 5(21) and 3(6) of the IBC, would place Respondent
No. 2 under the category of an operational creditor of the Petitioner, who
willingly participated in the CIRP of the Petitioner by duly submitting its
claims before the IRP.
10. It was contended that since the learned Arbitral Tribunal had ventured
into the interpretation of terms and provisions as defined under the IBC,
despite a categorical bar to that effect under Section 63 of the IBC, the
impugned order is patently illegal and beyond the jurisdiction of the learned
Arbitral Tribunal and the same is liable to be set aside. The said provision is
reproduced as under: -
“63. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.—No civil court or
authority shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings
in respect of any matter on which National Company Law Tribunal
or the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal has jurisdiction
under this Code.”
11. It was further submitted that by virtue of the non obstante clause
contained in Section 238 of the IBC, the provisions of the Code have an
overriding effect over all other laws. The said provision is reproduced as
under: -
“238. Provisions of this Code to override other laws.—The
provisions of this Code shall have effect, notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being
in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.”
12. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the impugned order
passed by the learned Arbitral Tribunal failed to appreciate the letter dated
30.07.2018 sent by the RP to Respondent No. 2 in its reply to letter dated
06.06.2018, whereby the RP categorically informed Respondent No. 2 that its
claim was not a crystalized liability, but was a contingent claim, and the
treatment of the same would depend upon the terms of the Resolution Plan
which would finally be approved. It was submitted that the findings of the
learned Arbitral Tribunal were limited to the communications dated
17.04.2018 and 06.06.2018, vide which the RP had informed Respondent No.
2 that the treatment of its alleged claims was entirely up to the successful
resolution applicant and the decision of the CoC, and thus, the learned
Arbitral Tribunal failed to appreciate that the RP had performed its duties in
terms of the mandate as prescribed in the IBC.
13. It was further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that the learned
Arbitral Tribunal wrongly gave finding on the working of the RP, and
ventured beyond its jurisdiction when commenting upon the working of the
RP of the Petitioner. It was submitted that the RP performed his duties as per
law and within the scope of IBC. It was further contended, without prejudice,
that any grievance or comments on the working RP were to be made only
before the Adjudicating Authority/Appellate Forum, as provided under the
IBC, and hence the learned Arbitral Tribunal lacked jurisdiction in this
regard, and therefore, as any grievance against the functioning of the RP is
within the statutory domain of the IBC, and the finding of the learned Arbitral
Tribunal is in contravention of law and the impugned order is liable to be set
aside.
14. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the terms and provisions
of a Resolution Plan submitted by a prospective resolution applicant are based
upon the viability of the corporate debtor, and it is purely a commercial
document. It was further submitted that the resolution applicant in the
Resolution Plan stipulates its intention of taking over the corporate debtor
based upon the assets and liabilities thereof, thus taking into consideration the
commercial nature of the transaction.
15. It was submitted that the impugned order wrongly recorded that the
claim of Respondent No. 2 was not a part of the Information Memorandum,
whereas the name of Respondent No. 2 is duly reflected in the List of
Operational Creditors of the Petitioner. It was further submitted that the
approved Resolution Plan categorically bears the name of Respondent No. 2
in its Clause 8.6.2, whereby the claims of Respondent No. 2 had been
extinguished, and thus, if the claim of Respondent No. 2 had not been a part
of the Information Memorandum, then the name of Respondent No. 2 would
have neither featured in the List of Creditors, nor in the approved Resolution
Plan.
16. Learned Senior Counsel further placed reliance on the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in K. Sashidhar v. Indian Overseas Bank2
, and
submitted that the CoC may accept or reject a Resolution Plan submitted by a
resolution applicant and the commercial wisdom, as applied by the CoC in
either accepting or rejecting the said plan, is non-justiciable. It was further
submitted that in the event of approval of a Resolution Plan by the CoC, the
treatment given to the creditors of the corporate debtor, both financial and
operational, cannot be put to challenge by any person in any Court of law or
authority. The commercial wisdom employed by the CoC is supreme and the
said commercial wisdom is duly in play while considering the claims of the
creditors of the corporate debtor. The relevant paragraph of the said judgment
is reproduced as under: -
“52. As aforesaid, upon receipt of a “rejected” resolution plan the
adjudicating authority (NCLT) is not expected to do anything more;
but is obligated to initiate liquidation process under Section 33(1)
of the I&B Code. The legislature has not endowed the adjudicating
authority (NCLT) with the jurisdiction or authority to analyse or
evaluate the commercial decision of CoC much less to enquire into
the justness of the rejection of the resolution plan by the dissenting
2
 (2019) 12 SCC 150
financial creditors. From the legislative history and the background
in which the I&B Code has been enacted, it is noticed that a
completely new approach has been adopted for speeding up the
recovery of the debt due from the defaulting companies. In the new
approach, there is a calm period followed by a swift resolution
process to be completed within 270 days (outer limit) failing which,
initiation of liquidation process has been made inevitable and
mandatory. In the earlier regime, the corporate debtor could
indefinitely continue to enjoy the protection given under Section 22
of the Sick Industrial Companies Act, 1985 or under other such
enactments which has now been forsaken. Besides, the commercial
wisdom of CoC has been given paramount status without any
judicial intervention, for ensuring completion of the stated
processes within the timelines prescribed by the I&B Code. There
is an intrinsic assumption that financial creditors are fully informed
about the viability of the corporate debtor and feasibility of the
proposed resolution plan. They act on the basis of thorough
examination of the proposed resolution plan and assessment made
by their team of experts. The opinion on the subject-matter
expressed by them after due deliberations in CoC meetings through
voting, as per voting shares, is a collective business decision. The
legislature, consciously, has not provided any ground to challenge
the “commercial wisdom” of the individual financial creditors or
their collective decision before the adjudicating authority. That is
made non-justiciable.”
17. Learned Senior Counsel contended that the impugned order challenges
the commercial wisdom of the CoC and the same is contrary to the settled
position of law. It was further contended that the CoC was aware of the
treatment being given to the alleged claims of Respondent No. 2, however,
despite the same, proceeded with the approval of the Resolution Plan applying
its commercial wisdom. The learned Arbitral Tribunal, therefore, was
precluded from questioning the commercial wisdom of the CoC and the
approval of the treatment given to the claims of Respondent No. 2.
18. It was further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that TSL,
keeping in view the financial status of the Petitioner, submitted its Resolution
Plan subject to certain conditions, including that it would not assume any
liability towards claims pertaining to a period prior to the approval of the
Resolution Plan, save and except those admitted by the RP. It was submitted
that TSL had put a specific clause namely Clause 8.10.12 in the Resolution
Plan, and in terms of the said clause, all claims pertaining to the Petitioner,
including those arising out of Arbitral proceedings, stand fully discharged and
settled. The said clause is reproduced as under: -
“8.10.12. Effect on Operational Creditors and Other Creditors
Upon approval of the Plan by the Adjudicating Authority, the
provisions set out below shall be binding on the Operational
Creditors and the Other Creditors, under Section 3 l (I) of the IBC:
(i) Except to the extent of the Operational Creditors Settlement
Amount proposed to be paid (without an obligation to pay) to the
relevant Operational Creditors or the Liquation Value due to the
Operational Creditors in accordance with the terms of Sections 8.2
and 8.4, the Company shall have no Liability towards any
Operational Creditors and Other Creditors with regard to any
claims (as defined under the IBC) relating in any manner to the
period prior to the Closing Date (whether under Annexures 8, 9, 10,
11 or otherwise). Any such Liability shall be deemed to be owed
and due as of the Insolvency Commencement Date, the Liquidation
Value of which is NIL and therefore no amount is payable in
relation thereto. All such Liabilities shall immediately,
irrevocably and unconditionally stand fully and finally
discharged and settled with there being no further claims
whatsoever, and all forms of security created or suffered to
exist, or rights to create such a security, to secure any
obligations towards the Operational Creditors and Other
Creditors (whether by way of guarantee, bank guarantee,
letters of credit or otherwise) shall immediately, irrevocably
and unconditionally stand released and discharged, and the
Operational Creditors and Other Creditors shall waive all
rights to invoke or enforce the same. In accordance with the
foregoing, all claims (whether final or contingent, whether
disputed or undisputed, and whether or not notified to or
claimed against the Company) of all Governmental Authorities
(including in relation to Taxes and all other dues and statutory
payments to any Governmental Authority), relating to the
period prior to the Closing Date, shall stand fully and finally
discharged and settled.”
(emphasis supplied)
19. Learned Senior Counsel submitted that the TSL while submitting its
Resolution Plan, provided for claims which were recognized/categorized by
the RP as “sub-judice claims” and TSL vide its Resolution Plan stipulated that
all claims categorized as “sub-judice” shall be considered as full, due and
payable as on the insolvency commencement date and not merely as
contingent claims. It was further submitted that the Resolution Plan provided
that since the liquidation value of the Petitioner, as available to the
operational creditors, was assumed to be NIL, no amount was due and
payable towards such “sub-judice claims”, and the said division was taken
keeping in view the commercial viability of Petitioner. Attention of this Court
was drawn to Clause 8.6 of the Resolution Plan which deals with “Treatment
of Claims on Matters that are Sub Judice”, and specifically to Clause 8.6.2.
The said clause is reproduced as under: -
“8.6.2. In respect of Sub Judice Claims from Operational
Creditors (including without limitation, claims made by ISGEC
Heavy Engineering Limited), each such Sub Judice Claim is a
"claim" and "debt", each as defined under the IBC, and would
consequently qualify as "operational debt" (as defined under
the TBC) and therefore the full amount of such Sub Judice
Claims shall be deemed to be owed and due as of the Insolvency
Commencement Date, the Liquidation Value of which is
assumed to be NIL, and therefore no amount is payable in
relation thereto. Please also refer to Section 8.2.1 (iii) regarding
additional claims from Operational Creditors relating to a period
prior to the Insolvency Commencement Date and Section 8.
10.12(iv) regarding no claims being initiated by the Operational
Creditors during the period from the Effective Date until the
Closing Date.”
(emphasis supplied)
20. It was submitted that the Resolution Plan of TSL, as approved by the
CoC, was further approved by the Adjudicating Authority vide order dated
30.05.2019 and thus the same is a binding document in terms of Section 31(1)
of the IBC. It was further submitted that the Adjudicating Authority had also
approved the treatment given by TSL to the creditors of the Petitioner. The
said provision of the IBC reads as under: -
“31. Approval of resolution plan.—(1) If the Adjudicating
Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan as approved by the
committee of creditors under sub-section (4) of section 30 meets
the requirements as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 30, it
shall by order approve the resolution plan which shall be binding on
the corporate debtor and its employees, members, creditors,
[including the Central Government, any State Government or any
local authority to whom a debt in respect of the payment of dues
arising under any law for the time being in force, such as authorities
to whom statutory dues are owed,] guarantors and other
stakeholders involved in the resolution plan.
[Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before
passing an order for approval of resolution plan under this subsection, satisfy that the resolution plan has provisions for its
effective implementation.]”
21. Learned Senior Counsel submitted that a successful resolution
applicant cannot be saddled with additional liability beyond the liability
undertaken by it in the approved Resolution Plan. The Petitioner was acquired
by TSL, keeping in view of the financial viability of its assets. Once the
TSL’s Resolution Plan was approved by the Adjudicating Authority, the
financial exposure/obligation of TSL has to be governed by the approved
Resolution Plan only and thus, as a direct consequence of the CIRP and the
approved Resolution Plan, no amount towards any claim of Respondent No. 2
is due and payable by the Petitioner.
22. Learned Senior Counsel submitted that though the appellate/statutory
remedies have been provided, however, jurisdiction of a Civil Court and
Authorities (including the Arbitral Tribunal) have expressly been barred
under the IBC by virtue of Section 63 of the IBC. The IBC being a complete
Code, the legislature has consciously enacted the said provision to ensure that
the functioning of the adjudicatory forums is not hindered and interfered with
by other judicial and quasi-judicial bodies.
23. It was further submitted that the findings of the learned Arbitral
Tribunal in the impugned order are in contravention to the fundamental
principles and the legislative intent of the IBC. In terms of Section 63 of the
IBC, the learned Arbitral Tribunal was not empowered to adjudicate upon the
functioning of the RP or the interpretation of the term “creditor” and such
issues fall exclusively within the jurisdiction of the Adjudicating Authority
and the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as
“NCLAT”). Therefore, the impugned order suffers from lack of inherent
jurisdiction and is liable to be set aside.
24. It was further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that the
impugned order is perverse and there exists a patent lack of jurisdiction of the
learned Arbitral Tribunal in returning the findings as given in the impugned
order. It was further contended by the learned Senior Counsel that the
findings of the Arbitral Tribunal are against the provisions of the approved
Resolution Plan and the IBC.
25. Learned Senior Counsel placed reliance upon the judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Deep Industries Limited v. Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation Limited and Anr. 3
 and the relevant paragraphs of the said
judgment are as under: -
10. Mr K.M. Nataraj, the learned Additional Solicitor General
appearing on behalf of the respondent, took us through the facts and
was at pains to point out that under the relevant clause of the
contract, which is Clause 27.1, the notice invoking the arbitration
must specify all points of dispute with the details of the amount
claimed at the time of invocation of arbitration and not thereafter.
He stressed the fact that even a cursory reading of the notice dated
2-11-2017 would show that it was confined to illegal termination
and did not raise any plea as to the ban that was imposed for two
years. He further went on to distinguish SBP & Co. [SBP & Co. v.
Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] stating that it only applied at a
stage where an order of the Arbitral Tribunal was sought to be
interfered with directly under Articles 226/227, in which context
the seven-Judge Bench made its observations. The present is a case
where the Tribunal's orders had travelled to the first appellate court,
which appeal was then dismissed, as a result of which the first
appellate court's order came directly under the supervisory
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 227. He then referred
to Punjab Agro Industries Corpn. Ltd. v. Kewal Singh Dhillon
[Punjab Agro Industries Corpn. Ltd. v. Kewal Singh Dhillon,
(2008) 10 SCC 128] which is a judgment which distinguished SBP
& Co. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] in a case
in which an Article 227 petition was held to be maintainable against
an order rejecting a Section 11 application for appointment of an
3
(2020) 15 SCC 706
arbitrator. He then referred to several judgments stating that the
power under Article 227, though to be sparingly exercised, can
certainly be exercised in cases of patent lack of jurisdiction, and
that the present case is one such. He then defended the judgment
under appeal stating that the judgment under appeal correctly held
that in the circumstances of the present case no stay order could
possibly have been granted by the arbitrator under Section 17 on
the basis of fundamental principles contained in the Specific Relief
Act, in that damages could always be granted, and that therefore,
the injunction granted in the facts of the present case should have
been denied.
*** *** ***
17. This being the case, there is no doubt whatsoever that if
petitions were to be filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution
against orders passed in appeals under Section 37, the entire arbitral
process would be derailed and would not come to fruition for many
years. At the same time, we cannot forget that Article 227 is a
constitutional provision which remains untouched by the non
obstante clause of Section 5 of the Act. In these circumstances,
what is important to note is that though petitions can be filed under
Article 227 against judgments allowing or dismissing first appeals
under Section 37 of the Act, yet the High Court would be extremely
circumspect in interfering with the same, taking into account the
statutory policy as adumbrated by us hereinabove so that
interference is restricted to orders that are passed which are patently
lacking in inherent jurisdiction.
*** *** ***
21. It is true that in Punjab Agro Industries Corpn. Ltd. [Punjab
Agro Industries Corpn. Ltd. v. Kewal Singh Dhillon, (2008) 10
SCC 128], this Court distinguished SBP & Co. [SBP & Co. v. Patel
Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] stating that it will not apply to a
case of a non-appointment of an arbitrator. This Court held:
(Punjab Agro Industries Corpn. Ltd. case [Punjab Agro Industries
Corpn. Ltd. v. Kewal Singh Dhillon, (2008) 10 SCC 128], SCC p.
132, para 9)
“9. We have already noticed that though the order under
Section 11(4) is a judicial order, having regard to Section
11(7) relating to finality of such orders and the absence of any
provision for appeal, the order of the Civil Judge was open to
challenge in a writ petition under Article 227 of the
Constitution. The decision in SBP & Co. [SBP & Co. v. Patel
Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] does not bar such a writ
petition. The observations of this Court in SBP & Co. [SBP &
Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 618] that against an
order under Section 11 of the Act, only an appeal under
Article 136 of the Constitution would lie, is with reference to
the orders made by the Chief Justice of a High Court or by the
designate Judge of that High Court. The said observations do
not apply to a subordinate court functioning as designate of
the Chief Justice.”
(emphasis in original)
What is important to note is that the observations of this Court
in Punjab Agro Industries Corpn. Ltd. [Punjab Agro Industries
Corpn. Ltd. v. Kewal Singh Dhillon, (2008) 10 SCC 128] were for
the reason that no provision for appeal had been given by statute
against the orders passed under Section 11, which is why the High
Court's supervisory jurisdiction should first be invoked before
coming to this Court under Article 136. Given the facts of the
present case, this case is equally distinguishable for the reason that
in this case the Article 227 jurisdiction has been exercised by the
High Court only after a first appeal was dismissed under Section 37
of the Act.”
26. Further reliance was placed upon the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Punjab State Power Corporation Limited v. Emta Coal Limited and
Anr.4
. The relevant paragraph of the judgment is reproduced as under: -
“4. We are of the view that a foray to the writ court from a
Section 16 application being dismissed by the arbitrator can only be
if the order passed is so perverse that the only possible conclusion
is that there is a patent lack in inherent jurisdiction. A patent lack of
inherent jurisdiction requires no argument whatsoever — it must be
the perversity of the order that must stare one in the face.”
4
(2020) 17 SCC 93
27. Learned Senior Counsel further contended that the instant petition is
maintainable and in support of the same, reliance was placed upon the
judgment of this Court in Surender Kumar Singal and Ors. v. Arun Kumar
Bhalotia and Ors.5
, wherein while relying upon the decisions of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Deep Industries (supra) and Punjab State Power
Corporation (supra), this Court had held that a Writ petition under Articles
226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, 1950 would be maintainable against
an order passed by an Arbitral Tribunal. The relevant paragraph of the said
judgment is as under: -
“25. A perusal of the above-mentioned decisions, shows that the
following principles are well settled, in respect of the scope of
interference under Article 226/227 in challenges to orders by an
arbitral tribunal including orders passed under Section 16 of the
Act.
(i) An arbitral tribunal is a tribunal against which a petition under
Article 226/227 would be maintainable;
(ii) The non-obstante clause in section 5 of the Act does not apply
in respect of exercise of powers under Article 227 which is a
Constitutional provision;
(iii) For interference under Article 226/227, there have to be
‘exceptional circumstances’;
(iv) Though interference is permissible, unless and until the order is
so perverse that it is patently lacking in inherent jurisdiction, the
writ court would not interfere;
(v) Interference is permissible only if the order is completely
perverse i.e., that the perversity must stare in the face;
(vi) High Courts ought to discourage litigation which necessarily
interfere with the arbitral process;
52021 SCC OnLine Del 3708
(vii) Excessive judicial interference in the arbitral process is not
encouraged;
(viii) It is prudent not to exercise jurisdiction under Article
226/227;
(ix) The power should be exercised in ‘exceptional rarity’ or if
there is ‘bad faith’ which is shown;
(x) Efficiency of the arbitral process ought not to be allowed to
diminish and hence interdicting the arbitral process should be
completely avoided.”
28. Learned Senior Counsel further contended that the impugned order
undermines the binding value of the approved Resolution Plan. It was
submitted that the law is now well settled that a corporate debtor cannot be
made to face undecided or residual claims after the approval of a resolution
plan, as the same would defeat the very object of the IBC. In support of the
said contention, reliance was placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited v. Satish
Kumar Gupta 6
, and the relevant paragraphs of the said judgment are
reproduced as under: -
“41. At the first meeting of the Committee of Creditors, which shall
be held within 7 days of its constitution, the Committee, by
majority vote of not less than 66% of the voting share of financial
creditors, must immediately resolve to appoint the interim
resolution professional as a resolution professional, or to replace
the interim resolution professional by another resolution
professional — see Sections 22(1) and (2) of the Code. Under
Section 23(1), the resolution professional shall conduct the entire
CIRP and manage the operations of the corporate debtor during the
same. Importantly, all meetings of the Committee of Creditors are
to be conducted by the resolution professional, who shall give
notice of such meetings to the members of the Committee of
6
 (2020) 8 SCC 531
Creditors, the members of the suspended Board of Directors, and
operational creditors, provided the amount of their aggregate dues
is not less than 10% of the entire debt owed. Like the duties of the
interim resolution professional under Section 18 of the Code, it
shall be the duty of the resolution professional to preserve and
protect assets of the corporate debtor including the continued
business operations of the corporate debtor — see Section 25(1) of
the Code. For this purpose, he is to maintain an updated list of
claims; convene and attend all meetings of the Committee of
Creditors; prepare the information memorandum in accordance
with Section 29 of the Code; invite prospective resolution
applicants; and present all resolution plans at the meetings of the
Committee of Creditors — see Sections 25(2)(e) to (i) of the Code.
42. Under Section 29(1) of the Code, the resolution professional
shall prepare an information memorandum containing all relevant
information, as may be specified, so that a resolution plan may then
be formulated by a prospective resolution applicant. Under Section
30 of the Code, the resolution applicant must then submit a
resolution plan to the resolution professional, prepared on the basis
of the information memorandum. After this, the resolution
professional must present to the Committee of Creditors, for its
approval, such resolution plans which conform to the conditions
referred to in Section 30(2) of the Code — see Section 30(3) of the
Code. If the resolution plan is approved by the requisite majority of
the Committee of Creditors, it is then the duty of the resolution
professional to submit the resolution plan as approved by the
Committee of Creditors to the Adjudicating Authority —
see Section 30(6) of the Code.
*** *** ***
86. Financial creditors are in the business of lending money. The
RBI Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India, 2017-2018
reflects that the net interest margin of Indian banks for Financial
Year 2017-2018 is averaged at 2.5%. Likewise, the global trend for
net interest margin was at 3.3% for banks in the USA and 1.6% for
banks in the UK in the year 2016, as per the data published on the
website of the bank. Thus, it is clear that financial creditors earn
profit by earning interest on money lent with low margins,
generally being between 1 to 4%. Also, financial creditors are
capital providers for companies, who in turn are able to purchase
assets and provide a working capital to enable such companies to
run their business operation, whereas operational creditors are
beneficiaries of amounts lent by financial creditors which are then
used as working capital, and often get paid for goods and services
provided by them to the corporate debtor, out of such working
capital. On the other hand, market research carried out by India
Brand Equity Foundation, a trust established by the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry, as regards the oil and gas sector, has
stated that the business risk of operational creditors who operate
with higher profit margins and shorter cyclical repayments must
needs be higher. Also, operational creditors have an immediate exit
option, by stopping supply to the corporate debtor, once corporate
debtors start defaulting in payment. Financial creditors may exit on
their long-term loans, either upon repayment of the full amount or
upon default, by recalling the entire loan facility and/or enforcing
the security interest which is a time consuming and lengthy process
which usually involves litigation. Financial creditors are also part
of a regulated banking system which involves not merely declaring
defaulters as non-performing assets but also involves restructuring
such loans which often results in foregoing unpaid amounts of
interest either wholly or partially.
*** *** ***
88. By reading para 77 (of Swiss Ribbons [Swiss Ribbons (P)
Ltd. v. Union of India, (2019) 4 SCC 17]) dehors the earlier
paragraphs, the Appellate Tribunal has fallen into grave error. Para
76 clearly refers to the Uncitral Legislative Guide which makes it
clear beyond any doubt that equitable treatment is only of similarly
situated creditors. This being so, the observation in para 77 cannot
be read to mean that financial and operational creditors must be
paid the same amounts in any resolution plan before it can pass
muster. On the contrary, para 77 itself makes it clear that there is a
difference in payment of the debts of financial and operational
creditors, operational creditors having to receive a minimum
payment, being not less than liquidation value, which does not
apply to financial creditors. The amended Regulation 38 set out in
para 77 again does not lead to the conclusion that financial and
operational creditors, or secured and unsecured creditors, must be
paid the same amounts, percentage wise, under the resolution plan
before it can pass muster. Fair and equitable dealing of operational
creditors' rights under the said regulation involves the resolution
plan stating as to how it has dealt with the interests of operational
creditors, which is not the same thing as saying that they must be
paid the same amount of their debt proportionately. Also, the fact
that the operational creditors are given priority in payment over all
financial creditors does not lead to the conclusion that such
payment must necessarily be the same recovery percentage as
financial creditors. So long as the provisions of the Code and the
Regulations have been met, it is the commercial wisdom of the
requisite majority of the Committee of Creditors which is to
negotiate and accept a resolution plan, which may involve
differential payment to different classes of creditors, together with
negotiating with a prospective resolution applicant for better or
different terms which may also involve differences in distribution
of amounts between different classes of creditors.
*** *** ***
107. For the same reason, the impugned NCLAT judgment
[Standard Chartered Bank v. Satish Kumar Gupta, 2019 SCC
OnLine NCLAT 388] in holding that claims that may exist apart
from those decided on merits by the resolution professional and by
the Adjudicating Authority/Appellate Tribunal can now be decided
by an appropriate forum in terms of Section 60(6) of the Code, also
militates against the rationale of Section 31 of the Code. A
successful resolution applicant cannot suddenly be faced with
“undecided” claims after the resolution plan submitted by him has
been accepted as this would amount to a hydra head popping up
which would throw into uncertainty amounts payable by a
prospective resolution applicant who would successfully take over
the business of the corporate debtor. All claims must be submitted
to and decided by the resolution professional so that a prospective
resolution applicant knows exactly what has to be paid in order that
it may then take over and run the business of the corporate debtor.
This the successful resolution applicant does on a fresh slate, as has
been pointed out by us hereinabove. For these
reasons, NCLAT judgment must also be set aside on this count.
29. Further, reliance was placed upon the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Ghanashyam Mishra & Sons (P) Ltd. v. Edelweiss Asset
Reconstruction Co. Ltd.7
, and the relevant portion of the said judgment is
reproduced as under: -
“Conclusion
102. In the result, we answer the questions framed by us as under:
102.1. That once a resolution plan is duly approved by the
adjudicating authority under sub-section (1) of Section 31, the
claims as provided in the resolution plan shall stand frozen and will
be binding on the corporate debtor and its employees, members,
creditors, including the Central Government, any State Government
or any local authority, guarantors and other stakeholders. On the
date of approval of resolution plan by the adjudicating authority, all
such claims, which are not a part of resolution plan, shall stand
extinguished and no person will be entitled to initiate or continue
any proceedings in respect to a claim, which is not part of the
resolution plan.
102.2. The 2019 Amendment to Section 31 of the I&B Code is
clarificatory and declaratory in nature and therefore will be
effective from the date on which the I&B Code has come into
effect.
102.3. Consequently all the dues including the statutory dues owed
to the Central Government, any State Government or any local
authority, if not part of the resolution plan, shall stand extinguished
and no proceedings in respect of such dues for the period prior to
the date on which the adjudicating authority grants its approval
under Section 31 could be continued.”
30. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the law as enunciated in
Ghanashyam Mishra (supra), has been reiterated by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Ruchi Soya Industries Limited v. Union of India and Ors.
8
and the
relevant portion of the said judgment is reproduced as under: -
7
 (2021) 9 SCC 657
8
 2022 SCC OnLine SC 455
“10. We find that the present appeals are squarely covered by the
law laid down by this Court in Ghanashyam Mishra & Sons (P)
Ltd. [Ghanashyam Mishra & Sons (P) Ltd. v. Edelweiss Asset
Reconstruction Co. Ltd., (2021) 9 SCC 657 : (2021) 4 SCC (Civ)
638] It will be relevant to refer to para 102 of the said judgment
which reads as under : (SCC p. 716)
“102. In the result, we answer the questions framed by us as under:
102.1. That once a resolution plan is duly approved by the
adjudicating authority under sub-section (1) of Section 31, the
claims as provided in the resolution plan shall stand frozen and will
be binding on the corporate debtor and its employees, members,
creditors, including the Central Government, any State Government
or any local authority, guarantors and other stakeholders. On the
date of approval of resolution plan by the adjudicating authority, all
such claims, which are not a part of resolution plan, shall stand
extinguished and no person will be entitled to initiate or continue
any proceedings in respect to a claim, which is not part of the
resolution plan.
102.2. The 2019 Amendment to Section 31 of the I&B Code is
clarificatory and declaratory in nature and therefore will be
effective from the date on which the I&B Code has come into
effect.
102.3. Consequently all the dues including the statutory dues owed
to the Central Government, any State Government or any local
authority, if not part of the resolution plan, shall stand extinguished
and no proceedings in respect of such dues for the period prior to
the date on which the adjudicating authority grants its approval
under Section 31 could be continued.”
11. Admittedly, the claim in respect of the demand which is the
subject-matter of the present proceedings was not lodged by
Respondent 2 after public announcements were issued under
Sections 13 and 15 IBC. As such, on the date on which the
resolution plan was approved by the learned NCLT, all claims
stood frozen, and no claim, which is not a part of the resolution
plan, would survive.
12. In that view of the matter, the appeals deserve to be allowed
only on this ground. It is held that the claim of the respondent,
which is not part of the resolution plan, does not survive. The
amount deposited by the appellant at the time of admission of the
appeals along with interest accrued thereon is directed to be
refunded to the appellant.”
31. Learned Senior Counsel further placed reliance upon the Counter
Affidavit dated 15.06.2021, filed on behalf of Respondent No. 1/MCA, and
contended that the same supports the case of the Petitioner. In view thereof,
reliance was placed upon paragraph No. 3 of the said affidavit, which is
reproduced as under: -
“3. That in response to the contents of Para 6, it is submitted that
section 31(1) of the Code provides that once the resolution plan is
approved by the Adjudicating Authority, the same is binding on all
the stakeholders including the Central Government, any State
Government or any local authority to whom a debt in respect of
payment of dues arising under any law for the time being in force,
such as authorities to whom statutory dues are owed, including tax
authorities. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the matter of Committee
of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited Vs. Satish Kumar Gupta
& Ors. [Civil Appeal No. 8766-67/2019 and other petitions], also
observed that a successful resolution applicant cannot suddenly be
faced with "undecided" claims after the resolution plan submitted
by him has been accepted as this would amount to a hydra head
popping up which would throw into uncertainty amounts payable
by the successful resolution applicant. All claims must be submitted
to and decided by the resolution professional so that a prospective
resolution applicant knows exactly what is to be paid in order that it
may then take over and run the business of the CD. It is submitted
that the dispute is between two parties and provisions of the Code
are self explanatory and complete Code in itself. Further, the
Arbitral Tribunal is not empowered to decide the issues relating to
the Code, as under section 60(5)(c) of the Code the Adjudicating
Authority/ NCLT is empowered to deal with such issues.”
32. Learned Senior Counsel further drew the attention of this Court to the
Resolution Plan dated 11.06.2018, and in particular to Clause 8.1.4 thereof,
which deals with the “Remaining Financial Debt”:
8.1.4. Remaining Financial Debt
(i) The Remaining Financial Debt shall be transferred from the
Financial Creditors to the Resolution Applicant by way of
novation on the Closing Date, and the aggregate consideration
shall be the Debt Consideration. Upon completion of this step,
the Resolution Applicant shall hold all rights in respect of the
Remaining Financial Debt, which shall be payable by the
Company to the Resolution Applicant. Nothing set out in
Section 8.1.3 shall apply to the rights of the Resolution
Applicant (or limit the same in any manner) in respect of the
Remaining Financial. Debt, with regard to the period
commencing as of the Closing Date; and
(ii) The Remaining Financial Debt shall be unsecured and
subordinated debt, and the rights of the Resolution Applicant
with regard to the Remaining Financial Debt shall be
subordinated to any new borrowings of the Company and any
other instruments issued by the Company (other than equity
shares) with effect from the Closing Date, as set out in
Annexure 5 and as shall be provided in the Novation
Agreement proposed to be executed in this regard. Further,
the Resolution Applicant shall not be entitled to repayment of
the principal amounts of the Remaining Financial Debt
(excluding conversion of such subordinated debt into equity),
or be entitled to payment of interest prior to payment,
repayment or redemption of the entire debt due to the
Financial Creditors. The Remaining Financial Debt shall be
classified as "standard assets" in the books of the Resolution
Applicant.
The provisions of this Section 8.1.4 shall be read harmoniously
with the provisions of Section 8.11.3(vi) relating to the Guarantees
(as defined therein) issued by the Guarantors (as defined therein).
33. Learned Senior Counsel further placed reliance on the judgment on the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Kalyani Transco v. Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd.
9
,
and the relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under: -
“172. We now examine the contentions raised by the appellantJaldhi. It is submitted that the appellant was the largest OC of the
corporate debtor-BPSL and has been wrongly classified as a
“contingent creditor”. It is submitted that the appellant holds four
international arbitral awards in its favour and the RP has admitted
its claims to the tune of Rs. 1,51,37,57,761.65. It is submitted that
such a reclassification of the appellant is against settled law is
hugely detrimental to it as OCs were eligible to 50 per cent. of their
crystallised claims whereas contingent creditors were to be paid
only 10 per cent. as per the resolution plan. Per contra, the SRAJSW submitted that Jaldhi has been rightly classified as a
contingent creditor as it has treated itself as a contingent creditor
before the NCLT and had later changed its stance. It is further
submitted that the appellant withdrew various proceedings filed for
enforcement by it before the Calcutta High Court in order to pursue
an alternative remedy and therefore, the foreign awards could not
be deemed to be binding under Indian law.
173. We must firstly examine the stand taken by the appellantJaldhi before the NCLT from the approval order passed by the
NCLT on September 5, 2019 [ See page 636 of 233 Comp Cas.] :
“The contentions raised by Mr. A. S Chadha, learned senior
counsel appointed by the Adjudicating Authority-NCLT to
represent the cause of the operational creditors, have been that
the resolution plan has illegally classified ‘Jaldhi’ as
contingent creditor entitling to be paid only 10 per cent. of its
claim subject to a cap of Rs. 35 crores, if it crystallised within
two years from the date of approval of the resolution plan by
the CoC. It is evident that Jaldhi is an operational creditor and
its claim has been admitted by the resolution professional to
the extent of Rs. 151.3 crores. Jaldhi has been maintaining
that it has made a claim of Rs. 151.9 crores on the basis of 3
arbitration awards in its favour and against the corporate
debtor and that it has initiated execution proceeding by filing
9
 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2093
3 execution petitions before the hon'ble High Court of
Calcutta. Those proceedings were pending when the CIRP
was initiated on July 26, 2017. Later on, different submissions
were made and it was claimed that its claim is contingent
liability but not an operational debt and that contingent
liability can never be resolved under a resolution plan. It was
thus argued that the resolution applicant has to assume a risk
to contingent liability devolving on the corporate debtor in
future. In a separate application filed, Jaldhi again shifted
which is stand by arguing that although its claim had been
admitted by the RP but the resolution plan categorises its
claim has an identified contingent liability.
It was contended that it is the operational creditor and its
claim as a contingent liability then it cannot be dealt within
the resolution plan.”
174. It can thus be seen that the stance adopted by the appellant is
varying and inconsistent. On one hand, the appellant-Jaldhi had
claimed to be a contingent creditor and raised the contention that its
dues could not have been settled under the resolution plan and that
SRA-JSW would have to assume the risk in case the contingent
liability crystallises in the future. On the other hand, subsequently,
the appellant shifted its stand and claimed itself to be an OC which
was entitled to equal treatment with other OCs under the resolution
plan.
175. Before we examine whether the international arbitral awards
would be treated as contingent or crystallised debts, we must first
examine the status of foreign awards in light of the provisions of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 [ “Arbitration Act” for
short.] . Section 49 of the Arbitration Act reads thus:
“49. Enforcement of foreign awards.—Where the court is satisfied
that the foreign award is enforceable under this Chapter, the award
shall be deemed to be a decree of that court.”
176. It can thus be seen that the foreign award will be deemed to be
a decree of the court only when the court is satisfied that the foreign
award is enforceable under Part II, Chapter I of the Arbitration Act.
Therefore, a foreign award would not be automatically enforceable
in India. For it to be enforceable in India, the court is required to be
satisfied that such an award is enforceable under Part II, Chapter I
of the Arbitration Act.
177. It is relevant to note that though the appellants had initiated
proceedings for the execution of international arbitral award in its
favour before the Calcutta High Court, the appellants did not
prosecute the said proceedings, and the said proceedings were
dismissed as withdrawn. Had the appellants pursued the said
proceedings before the Calcutta High Court, the SRA-JSW would
have had an opportunity of contesting the said proceedings. Not
permitting the said proceedings to proceed in accordance with law,
in our view, would not permit the appellants to contend that their
claims had crystallised and settled as OCs entitling them to claim
under the resolution plan.
178. It is further to be noted that the provisions of the IBC only
differentiate between the OCs and the FCs. This was the reason
that the RP in the present case admitted the claim raised by the
appellant-Jaldhi as an OC of the corporate debtor. However,
after the admission of a claim, the SRA-JSW had classified the
appellant as a contingent creditor. Even though such a
classification was made by the SRA-JSW, the same had been
duly approved by the CoC who has the power to sanction the
resolution plan or enter into negotiations to modify it prior to
its approval. Such a decision squarely falls under the protected
umbrella of the “commercial wisdom” of the CoC which has
been given paramount status by this court in the case of K.
Sashidhar v. Indian Overseas Bank [(2019) 213 Comp Cas 356
(SC); (2019) 12 SCC 150; (2019) 4 SCC (Civ) 222; 2019 SCC
OnLine SC 257.] . It will be relevant to take note of the relevant
paragraphs of the said judgment which read thus [ See page
394 of 213 Comp Cas.] :
“As aforesaid, upon receipt of a ‘rejected’ resolution plan the
Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) is not expected to do
anything more; but is obligated to initiate liquidation process
under section 33(1) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code.
The Legislature has not endowed the Adjudicating Authority
(NCLT) with the jurisdiction or authority to analyse or
evaluate the commercial decision of the CoC much less to
enquire into the justness of the rejection of the resolution plan
by the dissenting financial creditors. From the legislative
history and the background in which the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, has been enacted, it is noticed that a
completely new approach has been adopted for speeding up
the recovery of the debt due from the defaulting companies. In
the new approach, there is a calm period followed by a swift
resolution process to be completed within 270 days (outer
limit) failing which, initiation of liquidation process has been
made inevitable and mandatory. In the earlier regime, the
corporate debtor could indefinitely continue to enjoy the
protection given under section 22 of the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 or under other such
enactments which has now been forsaken. Besides, the
commercial wisdom of the CoC has been given paramount
status without any judicial intervention, for ensuring
completion of the stated processes within the timelines
prescribed by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. There is
an intrinsic assumption that financial creditors are fully
informed about the viability of the corporate debtor and
feasibility of the proposed resolution plan. They act on the
basis of thorough examination of the proposed resolution plan
and assessment made by their team of experts. The opinion on
the subject-matter expressed by them after due deliberations
in the CoC meetings through voting, as per voting shares, is a
collective business decision. The Legislature, consciously, has
not provided any ground to challenge the ‘commercial
wisdom’ of the individual financial creditors or their
collective decision before the Adjudicating Authority. That is
made non-justiciable…
Whereas, the discretion of the Adjudicating Authority
(NCLT) is circumscribed by section 31 limited to scrutiny of
the resolution plan ‘as approved’ by the requisite per cent. of
voting share of financial creditors. Even in that enquiry, the
grounds on which the Adjudicating Authority can reject the
resolution plan is in reference to matters specified in section
30(2), when the resolution plan does not conform to the stated
requirements. Reverting to section 30(2), the enquiry to be
done is in respect of whether the resolution plan provides : (i)
the payment of the insolvency resolution process costs in a
specified manner in priority to the repayment of other debts of
the corporate debtor, (ii) the repayment of the debts of the
operational creditors in prescribed manner, (iii) the
management of the affairs of the corporate debtor, (iv) the
implementation and supervision of the resolution plan, (v)
does not contravene any of the provisions of the law for the
time being in force, (vi) conforms to such other requirements
as may be specified by the Board. The Board referred to is
established under section 188 of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code. The powers and functions of the Board
have been delineated in section 196 of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code. None of the specified functions of the
Board, directly or indirectly, pertain to regulating the manner
in which the financial creditors ought to or ought not to
exercise their commercial wisdom during the voting on the
resolution plan under section 30(4) of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code. The subjective satisfaction of the financial
creditors at the time of voting is bound to be a mixed baggage
of variety of factors. To wit, the feasibility and viability of the
proposed resolution plan and including their perceptions about
the general capability of the resolution applicant to translate
the projected plan into a reality. The resolution applicant may
have given projections backed by normative data but still in
the opinion of the dissenting financial creditors, it would not
be free from being speculative. These aspects are completely
within the domain of the financial creditors who are called
upon to vote on the resolution plan under section 30(4) of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code…
Indubitably, the inquiry in such an appeal would be limited to
the power exercisable by the resolution professional under
section 30(2) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code or, at
best, by the Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) under section
31(2) read with section 31(1) of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code. No other inquiry would be permissible.
Further, the jurisdiction bestowed upon the appellate authority
(NCLAT) is also expressly circumscribed. It can examine the
challenge only in relation to the grounds specified in section
61(3) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, which is
limited to matters ‘other than’ enquiry into the autonomy or
commercial wisdom of the dissenting financial creditors.
Thus, the prescribed authorities (NCLT/ NCLAT) have been
endowed with limited jurisdiction as specified in the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code and not to act as a court of
equity or exercise plenary powers.
In our view, neither the Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) nor
the Appellate Authority (NCLAT) has been endowed with the
jurisdiction to reverse the commercial wisdom of the
dissenting financial creditors and that too on the specious
ground that it is only an opinion of the minority financial
creditors. The fact that substantial or majority per cent. of the
financial creditors have accorded approval to the resolution
plan would be of no avail, unless the approval is by a vote of
not less than 75 per cent. (after amendment of 2018, with
effect from June 6, 2018, 66 per cent.) of voting share of the
financial creditors. To put it differently, the action of
liquidation process postulated in Chapter III of the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code, is avoidable, only if approval of the
resolution plan is by a vote of not less than 75 per cent. (as in
October, 2017) of voting share of the financial creditors.
Conversely, the legislative intent is to uphold the opinion or
hypothesis of the minority dissenting financial creditors. That
must prevail, if it is not less than the specified per cent. (25
per cent. in October 2017; and now after the amendment with
effect from June 6, 2018, 44 per cent.). The inevitable
outcome of voting by not less than requisite per cent. of
voting share of financial creditors to disapprove the proposed
resolution plan, de jure, entails in its deemed rejection…
The argument, though attractive at the first blush, but if
accepted, would require us to rewrite the provisions of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code. It would also result in
doing violence to the legislative intent of having consciously
not stipulated that as a ground—to challenge the commercial
wisdom of the minority (dissenting) financial creditors.
Concededly, the process of resolution plan is necessitated in
respect of corporate debtors in whom their financial creditors
have lost hope of recovery and who have turned into nonperformer or a chronic defaulter. The fact that the corporate
debtor concerned was still able to carry on its business
activities does not obligate the financial creditors to postpone
the recovery of the debt due or to prolong their losses
indefinitely. Be that as it may, the scope of enquiry and the
grounds on which the decision of ‘approval’ of the resolution
plan by the CoC can be interfered with by the Adjudicating
Authority (NCLT), has been set out in section 31(1) read with
section 30(2) and by the Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) under
section 32 read with section 61(3) of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code. No corresponding provision has been
envisaged by the Legislature to empower the resolution
professional, the Adjudicating Authority (NCLT) or for that
matter the Appellate Authority (NCLAT), to reverse the
‘commercial decision’ of the CoC much less of the dissenting
financial creditors for not supporting the proposed resolution
plan. Whereas, from the legislative history there is contra
indication that the commercial or business decisions of the
financial creditors are not open to any judicial review by the
Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate Authority.”
(emphasis supplied)
179. It can thus be seen that this court has held that the
Legislature purposefully did not include a means to challenge
the commercial wisdom exercised by the CoC. This makes a
challenge to the same non-justiciable. It has been further held
that a challenge cannot be raised against the decision making of
the CoC unless and until the grounds for challenge as given in
the Code are satisfied. Any interference in the paramount
objective of the CoC of exercising its commercial wisdom would
amount to the court rewriting the law and going against the
very objectives of the IBC.”
(emphasis supplied)
34. Learned Senior Counsel had further placed reliance upon the judgment
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Electrosteel Steel Ltd. v. Ispat Carrier (P)
Ltd.10, and had contended that the facts of the said case are similar to that of
the present case.
35. Learned Senior Counsel further submitted that the Hon’ble Supreme
10 (2025) 7 SCC 773
Court, in Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India 11 , had held that
insolvency proceedings under the IBC are proceedings in rem, having effect
against the world at large. The relevant paragraphs of the said judgment are
reproduced as under: -
“43. A financial creditor may trigger the Code either by itself or
jointly with other financial creditors or such persons as may be
notified by the Central Government when a “default” occurs. The
Explanation to Section 7(1) also makes it clear that the Code may
be triggered by such persons in respect of a default made to any
other financial creditor of the corporate debtor, making it clear that
once triggered, the resolution process under the Code is a collective
proceeding in rem which seeks, in the first instance, to rehabilitate
the corporate debtor. Under Section 7(4), the adjudicating authority
shall, within the prescribed period, ascertain the existence of a
default on the basis of evidence furnished by the financial creditor;
and under Section 7(5), the adjudicating authority has to be
satisfied that a default has occurred, when it may, by order, admit
the application, or dismiss the application if such default has not
occurred. On the other hand, under Sections 8 and 9, an operational
creditor may, on the occurrence of a default, deliver a demand
notice which must then be replied to within the specified period.
What is important is that at this stage, if an application is filed
before the adjudicating authority for initiating the corporate
insolvency resolution process, the corporate debtor can prove that
the debt is disputed. When the debt is so disputed, such application
would be rejected.
*** *** ***
82. It is clear that once the Code gets triggered by admission of a
creditor's petition under Sections 7 to 9, the proceeding that is
before the adjudicating authority, being a collective proceeding, is a
proceeding in rem. Being a proceeding in rem, it is necessary that
the body which is to oversee the resolution process must be
consulted before any individual corporate debtor is allowed to settle
its claim. A question arises as to what is to happen before a
11 (2019) 4 SCC 17
Committee of Creditors is constituted (as per the timelines that are
specified, a Committee of Creditors can be appointed at any time
within 30 days from the date of appointment of the interim
resolution professional). We make it clear that at any stage where
the Committee of Creditors is not yet constituted, a party can
approach NCLT directly, which Tribunal may, in exercise of its
inherent powers under Rule 11 of NCLT Rules, 2016, allow or
disallow an application for withdrawal or settlement. This will be
decided after hearing all the parties concerned and considering all
relevant factors on the facts of each case.”
36. In support of the aforesaid submissions, learned Senior Counsel further
placed reliance on the following judgments: -
i. Anuptech Equipment Pvt. Ltd. v. Ganpati Co-Op Housing Society Ltd.
and Ors.12;
ii. Karad Urban Cooperative Bank Ltd. v. Swapnil Bhingardevay and
Ors.13;
iii. Ebix Singapore Pvt. Limited v. Committee of Creditors of Educomp
Solutions Limited14;
iv. Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.15;
v. Tata Steel Ltd. v. CIT16;
vi. Paschimanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Limited v. Raman Ispat Pvt. Ltd.
and Ors.17;
vii. RPS Infrastructure Limited v. Mukul Kumar and Anr.18;
viii. Ultra Tech Nathdwara Cement Ltd. v. Union of India and Ors.19;
ix. Sirpur Paper Mills Limited & Anr. v. Union of India20;
x. Adhunik Metaliks Ltd. v. State of Odisha & Ors. W.P.(C) No.1553 of
2022;
12 1999(2) Mh.L.J. 161
13 (2020) 9 SCC 729
14 (2022) 2 SCC 401
15 2022 SCC OnLine Del 2337
16 2023 SCC OnLine Del 6987
17 (2023) 10 SCC 60
18 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1147
19 2020 SCC Online Raj 1097
20 2022 SCC OnLine TS 130
xi. Sree Metaliks Ltd. v. Additional Director General & Ors.21;
xii. Commissioner of Central Excise Pune II v. SS Engineers Civil Appeal
No. 5700 of 2019;
xiii. Patna Highway Projects Ltd. v. State of Bihar and Ors.22;
xiv. Pr. Commissioner of Income Tax v. Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd.,
Order dated 10.08.2018 in SLP (C) No. 6483/2018;
xv. Innoventive Industries Ltd. v. ICICI Bank and Ors.23;
xvi. Duncan Industries Limited v. A.J.Agrochem24;
xvii. Unigreen Global Private Limited v. Punjab National Bank and Ors.25;
xviii. Solidaire India Ltd. v. Fairgrowth Financial Services Ltd. and Ors.26;
xix. Jotun India Private Limited v. PSL Limited 201827;
xx. State of Haryana Ors. v. Vinod Kumar and Ors.28;
xxi. Srei Infrastructure Finance Ltd. v. Tuff Drilling Private Limited29;
xxii. Pratap Technocrats (P) Ltd. and Others v. Monitoring Committee of
Reliance Infratel Limited and Another30;
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 1/MCA
37. Learned CGSC appearing on behalf of Respondent No. 1/MCA
submitted that the IBC had been enacted to consolidate and amend the laws
pertaining to reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate persons, in
a time-bound manner, for maximisation of value of assets, promotion of
21 2023 SCC OnLine Del 941
22 2024 SCC OnLine Pat 4238
23 (2018) 1 SCC 407
24 (2019) 9 SCC 725
25 2017 SCC Online NCLAT 566
26 (2001) 3 SCC 71
27 2018 SCC OnLine Bom 20570
28 1986 P&H 407
29 2018 (11) SCC 470
30 (2021) 10 SCC 623
entrepreneurship and availability of credit, and balancing the interests of all
stakeholders. It was submitted that the IBC envisages a creditor-in-control
model, wherein the CIRP is undertaken through a Resolution Plan.
38. It was further submitted that under the CIRP, the Resolution
Professional is mandated to verify claims as on the insolvency
commencement date in terms of Regulation 13 of the CIRP Regulations, and
to maintain a list of creditors. The Resolution Professional is also required to
prepare the Information Memorandum under Regulation 36(2) of the CIRP
Regulations, which contains, inter alia, details of the corporate debtor, the list
of creditors with the amounts claimed and admitted, and particulars of
material litigations.
39. Learned CGSC further submitted that once a Resolution Plan submitted
by a prospective resolution applicant is approved by the CoC, and thereafter
by the Adjudicating Authority under Section 31(1) of the IBC, the same
becomes binding on the corporate debtor and all stakeholders, including the
Central Government, State Governments and local Authorities. In this regard,
reliance was placed on the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Swiss
Ribbons (supra).
40. It was further submitted that the IBC is a complete Code in itself.
Reliance had been placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Innoventive Industries (supra) and the relevant portion of the said judgment
is reproduced as under: -
“55. It is settled law that a consolidating and amending Act like the
present Central enactment forms a code complete in itself and is
exhaustive of the matters dealt with therein. In Ravula Subba
Rao v. CIT [Ravula Subba Rao v. CIT, 1956 SCR 577 : AIR 1956
SC 604] , this Court held: (SCR p. 585 : AIR p. 610, para 10)
“10. … The Act is, as stated in the Preamble, one to
consolidate and amend the law relating to income tax. The rule of
construction to be applied to such a statute is thus stated by Lord
Herschell in Bank of England v. Vagliano Bros. [Bank of
England v. Vagliano Bros., 1891 AC 107 (HL)] : (AC pp. 144-45)
‘… I think the proper course is in the first instance to examine
the language of the statute, and to ask what is its natural meaning,
uninfluenced by any considerations derived from the previous state
of the law, and not to start with inquiring how the law previously
stood, and then, assuming that it was probably intended to leave it
unaltered.…’
We must therefore construe the provisions of the Indian
Income Tax Act as forming a code complete in itself and
exhaustive of the matters dealt with therein, and ascertain what
their true scope is.”
*** *** ***
58. There can be no doubt, therefore, that the Code is a
Parliamentary law that is an exhaustive code on the subject-matter
of insolvency in relation to corporate entities, and is made under
Entry 9, List III in the Seventh Schedule which reads as under:
“9. Bankruptcy and insolvency”
41. Learned CGSC had further relied upon the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Embassy Property Developments (P) Ltd. v. State of
Karnataka31, wherein it was observed as under: -
11. It is beyond any pale of doubt that the IBC, 2016 is a complete
code in itself. As observed by this Court in Innoventive Industries
Ltd. v. Icici Bank [Innoventive Industries Ltd. v. Icici Bank, (2018)
1 SCC 407 : (2018) 1 SCC (Civ) 356 : AIR 2017 SC 4084] it is an
31 (2020) 13 SCC 308
exhaustive code on the subject-matter of insolvency in relation to
corporate entities and others. It is also true that the IBC, 2016 is a
single Unified Umbrella Code, covering the entire gamut of the law
relating to insolvency resolution of corporate persons and others in
a time-bound manner. The Code provides a three-tier mechanism,
namely, (i) the NCLT, which is the adjudicating authority, (ii)
the Nclat, which is the appellate authority, and (iii) this Court as the
final authority, for dealing with all issues that may arise in relation
to the reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate
persons. Insofar as insolvency resolution of corporate debtors and
personal guarantors are concerned, any order passed by the NCLT
is appealable to Nclat under Section 61 of the IBC, 2016 and the
orders of the Nclat are amenable to the appellate jurisdiction of this
Court under Section 62. It is in this context that the action of the
State of Karnataka in bypassing the remedy of appeal to Nclat and
the act of the High Court in entertaining the writ petition against the
order [Vasudevan v. State of Karnataka, 2019 SCC OnLine NCLT
681] of the NCLT are being questioned.
42. It was further submitted by the Learned CGSC that Sections 60(5) and
63 of the IBC confer exclusive jurisdiction on the National Company Law
Tribunal, in respect of any question of law or fact arising out of or in relation
to insolvency resolution proceedings and bar the jurisdiction of Civil Courts
and other fora. It was contended that issues pertaining to the CIRP, the
Resolution Plan and the functioning of the Resolution Professional, fall within
the domain of the Adjudicating Authority and cannot be adjudicated by any
other fora, including an Arbitral Tribunal.
43. It was further submitted that the IBC provides a complete appellate
mechanism under Sections 61 and 62, enabling any aggrieved person to prefer
an appeal before the NCLAT and thereafter before the Hon’ble Supreme
Court, and therefore, questions arising out of insolvency proceedings are
required to be addressed only within the statutory framework of the IBC. The
said provisions are reproduced as under: -
“61. Appeals and Appellate Authority.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained under the Companies Act 2013
(18 of 2013), any person aggrieved by the order of the Adjudicating
Authority under this part may prefer an appeal to the National
Company Law Appellate Tribunal.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be filed within thirty
days before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal:
Provided that the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal
may allow an appeal to be filed after the expiry of the said period of
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing the appeal but such period shall not exceed fifteen days.
(3) An appeal against an order approving a resolution plan under
section 31 may be filed on the following grounds, namely:—
(i) the approved resolution plan is in contravention of the
provisions of any law for the time being in force;
(ii) there has been material irregularity in exercise of the
powers by the resolution professional during the corporate
insolvency resolution period;
(iii) the debts owed to operational creditors of the corporate
debtor have not been provided for in the resolution plan in the
manner specified by the Board;
(iv) the insolvency resolution process costs have not been
provided for repayment in priority to all other debts; or
(v) the resolution plan does not comply with any other criteria
specified by the Board.
(4) An appeal against a liquidation order passed under section 33
may be filed on grounds of material irregularity or fraud committed
in relation to such a liquidation order.
62. Appeal to Supreme Court.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an
order of the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal may file an
appeal to the Supreme Court on a question of law arising out of
such order under this Code within forty-five days from the date of
receipt of such order. (2) The Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied
that a person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an
appeal within forty-five days, allow the appeal to be filed within a
further period not exceeding fifteen days.”
44. Learned CGSC further placed reliance on the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Limited
(supra) to submit that a successful resolution applicant cannot be faced with
undecided claims after approval of the Resolution Plan, as that would amount
to a hydra head popping up and the same would defeat the objective of the
IBC. It was submitted that all claims were required to be submitted to and
dealt with during the CIRP so that the resolution applicant was made aware of
the exact liabilities at the time of taking over the corporate debtor.
45. Learned CGSC placed reliance on the order dated 23.06.2020 in
Company Appeal (AT)(Insolvency) No. 319/2020 passed by the learned
NCLAT in State of Haryana v. Uttam Strips Ltd. and Ors., while dealing
with issue of raising belated claims by the creditors of the corporate debtor
after the implementation of the Resolution Plan. It was submitted that a
successful resolution applicant cannot be saddled with past liabilities beyond
what is provided in the approved Resolution Plan.
46. It was submitted by the learned CGSC that once a claim has been
considered during the CIRP and provided for in the Resolution Plan, which
has been approved by the Adjudicating Authority, such creditor cannot
thereafter seek to recover any amount from the resolution applicant and any
grievance against the Resolution Plan is required to be raised before the
NCLAT in accordance with the statutory remedies under the IBC.
47. It was submitted that in view of the binding nature of the approved
Resolution Plan under Section 31 read with Section 238 of the IBC, and the
exclusive jurisdiction vested in the Adjudicating Authority, any adjudication
by an Arbitral Tribunal on issues arising out of or relating to the CIRP, the
Resolution Plan or claims dealt with therein, would be without jurisdiction
and hence the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 2
48. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent No. 2 submitted
that the remedy under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, is not
available to the Petitioner in the present case, since an alternate and more
efficacious remedy is presently available under the Arbitration Act.
49. It was further submitted by the learned counsel that the law is well
settled that if a statute provides an alternate remedy, which is equally
efficacious, a Writ should ordinarily not be entertained. In support of the said
proposition, reliance was placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Seth Chand Ratan v. Pandit Durga Prasad32. The relevant portion
of the judgment is reproduced as under: -
“13. Even otherwise, the view taken by the Division Bench of the
High Court for repelling the objection of the appellant regarding the
maintainability of the writ petition that an alternative remedy does
not divest the High Court of its powers to entertain petitions under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, has hardly any application
on the facts of the present case. It has been settled by a long catena
32 (2003) 5 SCC 399
of decisions that when a right or liability is created by a statute,
which itself prescribes the remedy or procedure for enforcing the
right or liability, resort must be had to that particular statutory
remedy before seeking the discretionary remedy under Article 226
of the Constitution. This rule of exhaustion of statutory remedies is
no doubt a rule of policy, convenience and discretion and the court
may in exceptional cases issue a discretionary writ of certiorari.
Where there is complete lack of jurisdiction for the officer or
authority or tribunal to take action or there has been a contravention
of fundamental rights or there has been a violation of rules of
natural justice or where the Tribunal acted under a provision of law,
which is ultra vires, then notwithstanding the existence of an
alternative remedy, the High Court can exercise its jurisdiction to
grant relief. In the present case, the alternative remedy of
challenging the judgment of the court was not before some other
forum or tribunal. On the contrary, by virtue of sub-section (3) of
Section 27 of the Act, the order passed by the court amounted to a
decree against which an appeal lay to the High Court. When the
party had statutory remedy of assailing the order passed by the
District Court by filing an appeal to the High Court itself, he could
not bypass the said remedy and take recourse to proceedings under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution. Such a course of action
may enable a litigant to defeat the provisions of the statute which
may provide for certain conditions for filing the appeal, like
limitation, payment of court fee or deposit of some amount or
fulfilment of some other conditions for entertaining the appeal.
50. It was contended by the learned counsel for Respondent No. 2 that the
Arbitration Act provides for a remedy to the Petitioner under Section 34, and
a challenge under the said provision can be raised once the Petitioner
ultimately suffers from an award. The Court exercising powers under Section
34 of the Act is adequately empowered to do complete justice between the
parties, and therefore, interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India is not warranted by this Court.
51. It was further submitted that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Lalitkumar
V. Sanghavi v. Dharamdas V. Sanghavi33, had held that the question as to
whether or not the mandate of the Arbitrator stands terminated under Section
12(2)(c) of the Arbitration Act, can be examined by the Court only under
Sections 14(2) of the Arbitration Act. Relevant portion of the judgment reads
as under: -
“12. On the facts of the present case, the applicability of clauses (a)
and (b) of Section 32(2) is clearly ruled out and we are of the
opinion that the order dated 29-10-2007 by which the Tribunal
terminated the arbitral proceedings could only fall within the scope
of Section 32, sub-section (2), clause (c) i.e. the continuation of the
proceedings has become impossible. By virtue of Section 32(3), on
the termination of the arbitral proceedings, the mandate of the
Arbitral Tribunal also comes to an end. Having regard to the
scheme of the Act and more particularly on a cumulative reading of
Section 32 and Section 14, the question whether the mandate of the
arbitrator stood legally terminated or not can be examined by the
court “as provided under Section 14(2)”.”
52. Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Bhaven Construction v. Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd.,34. It was
submitted that in view of the remedy enshrined in both Section 34 and Section
14 of the Arbitration Act, the present petition is not warranted and is liable to
be dismissed. Relevant portion of the said judgment reads as under: -
“18. In any case, the hierarchy in our legal framework, mandates
that a legislative enactment cannot curtail a constitutional right.
In Nivedita Sharma v. COAI [Nivedita Sharma v. COAI, (2011) 14
SCC 337 : (2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 947] , this Court referred to several
judgments and held : (SCC p. 343, para 11)
“11. We have considered the respective
arguments/submissions. There cannot be any dispute that the power
33 (2014) 7 SCC 255
34(2022) 1 SCC 75
of the High Courts to issue directions, orders or writs including
writs in the nature of habeas corpus, certiorari, mandamus, quo
warranto and prohibition under Article 226 of the Constitution is a
basic feature of the Constitution and cannot be curtailed by
parliamentary legislation — L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of
India [L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, (1997) 3 SCC 261 :
1997 SCC (L&S) 577] . However, it is one thing to say that in
exercise of the power vested in it under Article 226 of the
Constitution, the High Court can entertain a writ petition against
any order passed by or action taken by the State and/or its
agency/instrumentality or any public authority or order passed by a
quasi-judicial body/authority, and it is an altogether different thing
to say that each and every petition filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution must be entertained by the High Court as a matter of
course ignoring the fact that the aggrieved person has an effective
alternative remedy. Rather, it is settled law that when a statutory
forum is created by law for redressal of grievances, a writ petition
should not be entertained ignoring the statutory dispensation.”
(emphasis supplied)
It is therefore, prudent for a Judge to not exercise discretion to
allow judicial interference beyond the procedure established under
the enactment. This power needs to be exercised in exceptional
rarity, wherein one party is left remediless under the statute or a
clear “bad faith” shown by one of the parties. This high standard set
by this Court is in terms of the legislative intention to make the
arbitration fair and efficient.
*** *** ***
21. Viewed from a different perspective, the arbitral process is
strictly conditioned upon time limitation and modelled on the
“principle of unbreakability”. This Court in P. Radha Bai v. P.
Ashok Kumar [P. Radha Bai v. P. Ashok Kumar, (2019) 13 SCC
445 : (2018) 5 SCC (Civ) 773] , observed : (SCC p. 459, paras 36-
37)
“36.3. Third, Section 34(3) reflects the principle of
unbreakability. Dr Peter Binder in International Commercial
Arbitration and Conciliation in Uncitral Model Law Jurisdictions,
2nd Edn., observed:
‘An application for setting aside an award can only be made
during the three months following the date on which the party
making the application has received the award. Only if a
party has made a request for correction or interpretation of
the award under Article 33 does the time-limit of three
months begin after the tribunal has disposed of the request.
This exception from the three month time-limit was subject to
criticism in the working group due to fears that it could be
used as a delaying tactics. However, although “an
unbreakable time-limit for applications for setting aside” was
sought as being desirable for the sake of “certainty and
expediency” the prevailing view was that the words ought to
be retained “since they presented the reasonable consequence
of Article 33.’
According to this “unbreakability” of time-limit and true to
the “certainty and expediency” of the arbitral awards, any grounds
for setting aside the award that emerge after the three month timelimit has expired cannot be raised.
37. Extending Section 17 of the Limitation Act would go
contrary to the principle of “unbreakability” enshrined under
Section 34(3) of the Arbitration Act.”
(emphasis in original)
If the courts are allowed to interfere with the arbitral process
beyond the ambit of the enactment, then the efficiency of the
process will be diminished.”
53. It was further submitted that a Writ Court cannot interfere in an
Arbitral proceeding, as a matter of course, and that Writ jurisdiction may be
invoked only in the event an Arbitral Tribunal acts in gross excess of its
jurisdiction. It was further submitted that the said threshold is not met in the
present factual circumstances.
54. Reliance was placed on the order dated 18.09.2020 in SLP (C) No.
8482/2020 passed in Punjab State Power Corporation Limited (supra). It
was further submitted that the impugned order does not disclose any patent
lack of jurisdiction and the application on which the impugned order came to
be passed, did not allege that the Arbitral Tribunal lacked jurisdiction. It was
further contended that the plea raised before the learned Arbitral Tribunal was
merely that the Arbitral proceedings had become unnecessary on account of
subsequent events, and therefore, even on the Petitioner’s own showing, the
case was never one of lack of jurisdiction.
55. It was submitted that the petitioner had submitted to the jurisdiction of
the learned Arbitral Tribunal on two occasions. First, during the proceedings
under Section 29A of the Arbitration Act, as no plea as to lack of jurisdiction
was raised by the Petitioner, despite the Resolution Plan being in force.
Second, the application itself, filed under Section 16 and Section 32 of the
Arbitration Act, was in substance merely an application under Section 32 of
the Arbitration Act.
56. It was further submitted that a detailed order had been passed by the
learned Arbitral Tribunal after considering all relevant facts and
circumstances, and therefore, no ex-facie conclusion can be drawn with regard
to any alleged lack of jurisdiction. Without prejudice to the above, it was
submitted that even if the impugned order is assumed to be incorrect, the
same would, at best, amount to an incorrect exercise of jurisdiction and not a
case of inherent lack of jurisdiction.
57. It was further submitted that the “clean slate doctrine” applies in cases
where claims are admitted or rejected, and in cases where claims are not filed.
The said doctrine would not apply where a claim is preferred, but is kept
artificially contingent. Therefore, it was submitted that the present case is not
covered by the clean slate doctrine as expounded in by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel (supra).
58. It was contended that it is an admitted position that the claim of
Respondent No. 2 was never accepted and was classified as a “contingent
liability”. It was submitted that as a result, Respondent No. 2 was effectively
excluded from the CIRP process and, therefore, the approved Resolution Plan
cannot be made binding upon Respondent No. 2.
59. It was further submitted by the learned counsel that a Resolution Plan
cannot create a legal fiction, contrary to the Information Memorandum. It was
contended that since the IRP treated Respondent No. 2 as a contingent
creditor, the Resolution Plan could not thereafter treat Respondent No. 2 as an
operational creditor and reduce its claim to nil.
60. It was further submitted that under Sections 3(10) and 3(11) of the IBC,
a contingent liability does not constitute a “debt” and, therefore, a contingent
creditor is no creditor in the eyes of law, and consequently, the rigor of
Section 31 of the IBC does not apply in the present case. The said provisions
are reproduced as under: -
“3. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
…(10) “creditor” means any person to whom a debt is owed
and includes a financial creditor, an operational creditor, a secured
creditor, an unsecured creditor and a decree-holder;
(11) “debt” means a liability or obligation in respect of a
claim which is due from any person and includes a financial debt
and operational debt;”
61. It was submitted that under Regulation 37(f) of the Regulations, 2016, a
Resolution Plan may provide for a “reduction in the amount payable to the
creditors”, and therefore, it implies that a Resolution Plan can deal only with
crystalized liabilities of creditors. The said provision is reproduced as under: -
“Regulation 37: Resolution plan.
[37. A resolution plan shall provide for the measures, as may be
necessary, for insolvency resolution of the corporate debtor for
maximization of value of its assets, including but not limited to the
following:-
…(f) reduction in the amount payable to the creditors;”
62. Learned counsel for Respondent No. 2 further placed reliance upon
Clause (iv) and Clause 6.1.2 of the Resolution Plan to contend that the
Resolution Plan itself contemplates settlement of claims of operational
creditors based on the amounts admitted and due as on the Closing Date. The
said clauses are reproduced as under: -
“(iv) Operational Creditors Settlement Amount to Operational
Creditor (other than employees and workmen) - 50% of the amount
admitted and due to them as on the Closing Date, subject to a
maximum aggregate amount of< 50 crore, to be paid within a
period of 2 (two) months from the Closing Date.
*** *** ***
6.1.2. The total Outstanding Operational Debt of the Company
(excluding claims of workmen and employees) admitted towards its
Operational Creditors, as of August 30, 2018, is < 98, 12, 15,611
(Indian Rupees Ninety Eight Crore Twelve Lakh Fifteen Thousand
Six Hundred and Eleven only) and details of the same are set out in
Annexure 8 of this Plan.”
63. Attention of this Court was drawn to the List of Creditors (pursuant to
claims received and updated as on 13.09.2018), wherein the name of
Respondent No. 2 finds mention at Serial No. 3. It was further noted that a
corresponding remark had been recorded against the said entry, categorizing
the claim of Respondent No. 2 as contingent. The said list is reproduced as
under: -
64. Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Jaypee Kensington Boulevard Apartments Welfare Assn. v. NBCC (India)
Ltd.
35, and it was submitted that the position in relation to claims that are
pending crystallization, owing to an ongoing litigation, are covered by the
said judgment. The relevant portion of the judgment is as under: -
“145. Apart from the aforesaid, the reliefs and concessions as
sought for by the resolution applicant in relation to YEIDA in
Clauses 4, 14 and 27 of Schedule 3 are also required to be
disapproved. We are unable to countenance the proposition that by
way of a resolution plan, it could be enjoined upon an agency of the
Government like YEIDA to give up or withdraw from a pending
litigation. Similarly, extinguishment of existing liability
qua YEIDA is not a relief that could be given to the resolution
35 (2022) 1 SCC 401
applicant for askance. For the same reason, the resolution applicant
cannot seek extension of time period of the concession agreement
by way of a clause of “relief” in the resolution plan without the
consent of a governmental body like YEIDA.”
65. Learned counsel for Respondent No. 2 relied on the order dated
24.03.2023 in Civil Appeal No. 1741/2023 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Adani Power Limited v. Shapoorji Pallonji And Co. Pvt. Ltd. &
Ors.36 and submitted that even where a claim is categorized as a contingent
liability in the resolution process, Arbitral proceedings may continue for
adjudication and quantification of such claim. The relevant portion of the said
judgment reads as under: -
“2. In our opinion, there is no ambiguity in the above
observations and directions recorded by the NCLAT, as they reflect
that the Resolution Plan, as approved, is binding on all and cannot
be made subject matter of arbitration or any other proceedings. The
claim of respondent no. 1 - Shapoorji Pallonji and Co. Pvt. Ltd. has
been categorized by the Resolution Professional as a ‘contingent
liability’. Respondent no. 1 - -Shapoorji Pallonji and Co. Pvt. Ltd.
may continue with the arbitration proceedings for adjudication of
its claim and quantification thereof, if they so wish and choose to
do so.
3. However, the claim even if allowed in favour of M/s
Shapoorji Pallonji and Co. Pvt. Ltd. will have no bearing on the
rights and obligations of the appellant - M/s. Adani Power Limited,
which are in terms of the Resolution Plan. It has been held by the
judgment dated 23.02.2023, that the appellant cannot be saddled
with any liability except what is mentioned in the Resolution Plan.
4. Recording the aforesaid, the appeal is dismissed on the
ground that the appellant has no grievance.”
66. It was submitted that Arbitration proceedings in respect of disputed or
36 2023 SCC OnLine SC 2377
contingent claims may continue, notwithstanding the approval of a Resolution
Plan, for the purposes of adjudication and quantification thereof, and in
support of the said submission, reliance was placed on the order dated
21.01.2022 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Fourth Dimension
Solutions Ltd. v. Ricoh India Ltd. & Ors37
., in Civil Appeal No. 5908 of
2021. The relevant portion of the said order reads as under: -
“2. …During the hearing of the stated appeal, it was brought to
the notice of the Court that the appellant had preferred some appeal
before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (in short
"NCLAT") and it was still pending at the relevant time. This Court,
in paragraph 160 of the judgment, therefore, directed that the said
appeal shall proceed on merits. Pursuant to that liberty, the
concerned appeal has now been decided by the NCLAT vide
impugned judgment.
3. In our opinion, it was sufficient for the NCLAT to dispose of
the appeal before it by restating the factual position noted while
considering the Plan submitted for approval before the Committee
of Creditors. In paragraph 48 of the impugned judgment, the
NCLAT has noted thus:
"... The name of the Appellant was mentioned in the list of
Operational Creditors. On 29.11.2018 the RP published updated list of
Creditors of the Corporate Debtor, wherein the admitted claims of the
Appellant was indicated as 'Nil' with an appended note: "2. The claims
pertaining to FDSL have been disputed and are proceedings before the
Arbitrators/Appellate Authorities. The liability is subjected to outcome of
these proceedings".
4. In light of this factual position, in our opinion, the appeal
needs to be disposed of by restating the said fact with liberty to the
parties to pursue all contentions available to them in the
proceedings pending at the relevant time, if any.
5. It is stated that some arbitration proceedings were pending
between the parties. If so, all contentions available to both sides be
372022 SCC OnLine SC 2379
decided in the said proceedings on its own merits in accordance
with law.”
67. In order to support the aforesaid submissions, learned counsel further
placed reliance upon the following judgments:
i. Fourth Dimension Solutions Ltd. v. Ricoh India Ltd. & Ors.38;
ii. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Arcelor Mittal Nippon Steel India
Limited39;
iii. Indian Oil Corporation Limited v. Arcelor Mittal Nippon Steel India
Limited40;
iv. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited v. Om Construction &
Ors.41;
v. PME Power Solutions (India) Ltd. v. Airen Metals Pvt. Ltd.42;
vi. Siddhast Intellectual Property Innovations Pvt Ltd vs Controller
General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks43;
vii. Easy Trip Planners Ltd. v. One 97 Communications Ltd.44;
viii. Ambience Projects & Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs Neeraj Bindal45;
ix. Binani Industries Limited v. Bank of Baroda, Order dated 14.11.2018
in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 82 of 2018.
REJOINER SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
68. At the outset, learned Senior Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that
the averments made by Respondent No. 2 in its Counter Affidavit are
misconceived, misleading and liable to be rejected.
69. Learned Senior Counsel submitted that the present petition is
38 2021 SCC OnLine NCLAT 2142
39 (2024) ibclaw.in 57 SC
40 2023:DHC:7365
41 2023 SCC OnLine Bom 2219
42 (2024) ibclaw.in 1348 HC
43 2022 SCC OnLine Del 2556
44 2022 SCC OnLine Del 2186
45 2021 SCC OnLine Del 4023
maintainable, and the impugned order passed by the learned Arbitral Tribunal
suffers from patent lack of inherent jurisdiction. It was further contended that
the learned Arbitral Tribunal had ventured into a domain expressly barred by
Sections 63 and 231 of the IBC, and had rendered findings contrary to the
binding effect of an approved Resolution Plan under Section 31(1) of the IBC.
70. It was further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel that the
approved Resolution Plan constitutes a final and binding document governing
all rights and liabilities of the Petitioner for the period prior to its approval.
Any claim, whether admitted, disputed contingent or sub-judice, stands
extinguished, abated and withdrawn, except to the extent expressly provided
for in the Resolution Plan.
71. It was further submitted that the Claim of Respondent No. 2 was duly
categorized as a “contingent liability” and the Resolution Applicant expressly
dealt with the same in the approved Resolution Plan. It was submitted that the
contention of Respondent No. 2 that the claim was excluded from the CIRP
was factually incorrect and contrary to the record.
72. Learned Senior Counsel further contended that mere categorization of a
claim as contingent does not take it outside the purview of the Resolution
Plan, and once the Resolution Plan is approved by the Adjudicating
Authority, the treatment accorded to such claim becomes final and binding,
and the same cannot be re-agitated before any other fora, including an
Arbitral Tribunal.
73. It was submitted that the continuation of the Arbitral proceedings is
legally impermissible, as the claims as sought therein stand extinguished by
the approved Resolution Plan. It was further submitted that if the impugned
order is not set aside, then the same shall render the entire IBC regime otiose
and mere a paper legislation.
74. Learned Senior Counsel further reiterated that the IBC mandates that a
successful resolution applicant takes over the corporate debtor on a “clean
slate” and permitting Respondent No. 2 to continue Arbitration, would saddle
the Petitioner with additional liabilities.
75. It was further submitted that any grievance regarding the conduct of the
RP or the treatment of claims under the Resolution Plan could only have been
raised before the statutory fora under the IBC. It was submitted that the
learned Arbitral Tribunal lacked jurisdiction to adjudicate the matter touching
upon the CIRP, the Resolution Plan or its binding effects.
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
76. While passing the impugned order, the learned Arbitral Tribunal after
examining the contentions of both the parties, held that the claim of the
Respondent No. 2 was kept as “contingent” by the IRP in terms of the
Resolution Plan, therefore, the same did not form part of the Information
Memorandum in terms of the Section 29 of the IBC. It was further held that
since the claim was not crystalized, the Arbitral proceedings would continue.
The observations of the learned Arbitral Tribunal are as under: -
“18. Mr. Datta, Ld. Counsel for the Claimant submitted that the RP
having classified the Claimant as a Contingent Creditor. the RP has
in effect denied the status of creditor to the Claimant. Mr.
Bhatnagar, Ld. Sr. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that the
determination of the RP is immaterial, and the Claimant is indeed a
Creditor, irrespective of what the RP may say. The submission of
Mr. Bhatnagar cannot be accepted. The RP, under Regulation
13,14 and 15 of the IBBI (Corporate Insolvency Resolution
Process) Regulations, 2016 is obligated to verify the claims
submitted by individuals and affording them the status of
Creditor, if he deems fit. Those claims are then as per
Regulation 36 made part and parcel of the information
memorandum which is in effect all the data pertaining to the
Corporate Debtor (the Respondent in the present case). Finally,
a Resolution Plan submitted is governed by Section 30(1) of the
IBC. Section 30(1) makes it clear that a Resolution Plan is to be
prepared on the basis of the information memorandum.
19. Reading together the provisions as stated above, it is clear
that a Resolution Plan cannot be submitted contrary to the
Information Memorandum. The Information Memorandum is
based on the RPs decision on verification of claims. In the
present case, since the RP did not verify the claim of the
Claimant and merely treated the Claimant as a Contingent
Creditor, the Claimant could not have been a part of the
Information Memorandum (as a creditor). Therefore, a
Resolution Plan based on the very same information
memorandum could not treat the Claimant as anything but a
Contingent Creditor, and a Contingent Creditor not being a
creditor at all, the plan cannot bind the Claimant.
20. A Creditor is defined in the IBC as "any person to whom a
debt is owed". A debt is defined as a liability or obligation in
respect of a claim that is due. On a conjoint reading of the two
definitions, it is apparent that a creditor is any person to whom
the Corporate Debtor owes money. A Contingent Creditor is a
creditor to whom money could be due and payable on the
occurrence of a certain event. Therefore, till the occurrence of
that event a contingent creditor, is under the IBC, not
recognized as a creditor.
21. In view of the Claimant having not been classified as an
Operational Creditor, Financial Creditor or a Creditor, the
Claimant has been denied the opportunity of being a part of or
consideration in the CIRP on account of the present pending
arbitrations between the parties and on the premise that the
claims of ISGEC are disputed and are non-crystallized. ln the
opinion of the Tribunal. the Resolution Plan and entire process
cannot be made binding on the Claimant as the Claimant is not
part of the CIRP.
22. Under Regulation 37 (f) of the CIRP Regulations a Resolution
Plan may cause "reduction in the amount if payable to the
creditors." This also implies that a Resolution Plan can only deal
with crystallized liabilities of creditors. Alternatively, the RP could
have considered the claim of the Claimant and reduced the amount
of claim. But the RP has simply not considered the claim of the
Claimant.
23. It is basic to the civil law and jurisprudence that wherever there
is a right, there is a remedy. A wrong done has to be vindicated by
resort to appropriate legal proceedings. A legitimate right claimed
and asserted by a person cannot be refused to be adjudicated upon
and cannot just be buried except by a valid and express provisions
of law.
*** *** ***
25. We have exan1ined the scheme of IBC and have taken into
consideration all the relevant provisions of IBC in addition to those
to which our attention was specifically invited. There is no
provision in the IBC which can support the proposition that in
spite of a creditor having applied to the RP and the RP having
refused to consider the claim of the creditor yet it would stand
wiped out in spite of the fact that the creditor had invoked the
jurisdiction of appropriate civil forum (arbitral Tribunal), in
the present matter and his claim would not be permitted to be
crystallized as per law and would simply stand nullified.
*** *** ***
29. Mr. Datta, Ld. Counsel for the Claimant submitted that the
Resolution Plan only binds creditors and stakeholders. In the
present matter, it is an admitted fact that the claim of the Claimant
was disputed by Respondent and never admitted. Therefore, there
can be no question of the Resolution Plan being binding upon the
Claimant.
30. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr. A nil Bhatnagar, Ld. Sr.
Counsel placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Committee of Creditors of Essar Steel India Ltd. v. Satish Kumar
Gupta, 2019 SCC Online SC 1478. Their Lordships have rejected
the contention that claims may exist apart from those decided on
merits by the Resolution Professional and can be decided by an
appropriate forum as such contention militates against the rationale
of Section 31 of the IBC. However, their Lordships have further
held - 'all claims must be submitted to and decided by the
Resolution Professional'. The case before the Supreme Court was
of the members of the Promoter Group, who were guarantors and
were not parties to the Resolution Plan. The contention was that the
Resolution Plan cannot bind them to take away rights of
subrogation which they may have if they were ordered to pay
amounts guaranteed by them in the pending legal proceedings. Mr.
K. Dutta Ld. Counsel for the Claimant submitted that the
observations made in the case of Essar Steel (Supra) pertains to the
claims by creditors which are admitted, collated and verified by the
RP. Those observations would not cover a case like the present one
where the RP of the Respondent failed to admit the claim of the
Claimant though the Claimant was ready and willing to substantiate
its claim.
31. In the case before us, the Claimant did approach the RP but the
RP did not adjudicate the claim and treated it as contingent
obviously in view of the fact that the present arbitral proceedings
were pending.
32. For all the forgoing reasons, we are of the opinion that the
Application filed by the Respondent is devoid of merit. It is liable
to be rejected and is rejected, accordingly. This Order shall govern
the two arbitral disputes pending before this arbitral Tribunal
between the parties, hereat. One copy each of this Order shall be
placed on record of both the matters.”
(emphasis supplied)
77. Before this Court proceeds further, it would be apposite to refer to the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Electrosteel Steel Limited
(supra), since the factual matrix therein is similar to the present case. The
relevant facts of the said judgment are as under: -
i. The Hon’ble Supreme Court dealt with a dispute arising out of claims
preferred by the Respondent therein, before the West Bengal Micro,
Small and Medium Facilitation Council under the provisions of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (hereinafter
referred to as the “MSME Act”).
ii. The Respondent therein had supplied telescopic and truck mounted
cranes, crawler cranes, etc to the Appellant therein, on a hire basis
pursuant to purchase orders dated 02.06.2011 and 06.06.2011.
iii. The Respondent therein alleged non-payment of the amounts due under
the invoices raised and subsequently, the Respondent preferred two
claim petitions bearing Case No. 330/2014 and Case No. 331/2024
respectively.
iv. As per the requirement of the MSME Act, conciliation proceedings
were initiated, but were failed. Subsequent thereto, arbitration
proceedings between the parties commenced on 07.06.2017.
v. During the pendency of the said Arbitral proceedings, financial
creditors of the Appellant initiated proceedings under Section 7 of the
IBC before the learned National Company Law Tribunal, Kolkata
Bench, and the same was registered as C.P. (IB) No. 361/KB/2017.
Vide order dated 21.07.2017, the learned National Company Law
Tribunal imposed a moratorium under Section 14 of the IBC and
appointed an Interim Resolution Professional. Pursuant thereto, a
public announcement dated 24.07.2017 was issued by the Interim
Resolution Professional, calling upon all creditors to submit their
claims. In view of the moratorium, the Arbitral proceedings before the
Facilitation Council were kept in abeyance. Subsequent thereto, the
Respondent submitted its claim before the Resolution Professional,
which was partly admitted.
vi. On 29.03.2018, a Resolution Plan was submitted by Vedanta Limited,
and the same was placed before the Committee of Creditors, and
ultimately got approved by the learned National Company Law
Tribunal, vide order dated 17.04.2018, under Section 31 of the IBC. In
terms of the said approved Resolution Plan, the claims of operational
creditors were settled at nil value and the claim of the Respondent,
however, was not provided for in the resolution plan.
vii. The said order dated 17.04.2018, was challenged before the learned
National Company Law Tribunal, New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as
the NCLAT) in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 175/2018, by
some of the operational creditors and the same was dismissed by the
learned NCLAT vide order dated 10.08.2018.
viii. Subsequently, other creditors also approached the learned NCLAT in
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 265/2018 and in analogous
appeals, on grounds that in the Resolution Plan, the Resolution
Applicant had not taken proper care of the operational creditors. The
said appeals were also dismissed by the learned NCLAT vide order
dated 20.08.2018. The said matter was then carried forward to the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 1133/2019; however, the
said appeal was dismissed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order
dated 27.11.2019.
ix. Upon lifting of the moratorium, the Facilitation Council resumed the
Arbitral proceedings and the Appellant, did not participate in the said
proceedings. An Arbitral award dated 06.07.2018 came to be passed by
the Facilitation Council, directing the Appellant to pay a sum of INR
1,59,09,214.00/-, along with interest to the Respondent, in terms of
Section 16 of the MSME Act. The said Award was not challenged by
the appellant.
x. Subsequent thereto, the Respondent instituted execution proceedings,
which was initially registered as Execution Case No. 77/2018 and
thereafter, as Commercial Execution Case No. 21/2022 before the
Executing Court. During the pendency of the said execution
proceedings, the Appellant preferred a petition dated 14.05.2019,
contending that the Arbitral Award was a nullity, and hence, not
executable as the claim of the Respondent was already settled at nil as
per the Resolution Plan, and therefore, no sum was payable to the
Respondent.
xi. The said petition was dismissed by the Executing Court, vide order
dated 03.03.2023 and directed the Appellant to comply with the Award
dated 06.07.2018, within a period of 15 days. The said order was
challenged before the Hon’ble High Court, under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, 1950. The Hon’ble High Court had framed the
following questions for consideration:
a. The arbitral award having not been challenged under
Section 34 of the Act of 1996, whether the objection to
execution of the arbitral award referrable to Section 47 of
the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (CPC) was maintainable
by alleging that the arbitral award itself was a nullity and
hence non-executable?
b. Whether the arbitral award in the present case could be
assailed as a nullity and hence non-executable within the
permissible grounds of raising such a plea?
c. Irrespective of maintainability of the objection to the
arbitral award under Section 47 of the CPC, whether on
facts, the Facilitation Council lost its jurisdiction to
proceed and pronounce the arbitral award in view of the
insolvency resolution plan of the petitioner which was
duly approved under Section 31 of the IBC?
xii. Insofar as the first question was concerned, the Hon’ble High Court
was of the opinion that the plea of nullity qua an Arbitral Award can be
raised in an execution proceeding under Section 47 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. However, the scope of interference would be very narrow.
As regards to the second question, the Hon’ble High Court rejected the
contention of the Appellant that that since the award suffered from
patent or inherent lack of jurisdiction and therefore was a nullity, it can
be questioned at the stage of execution without challenging the award
under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.
xiii. The Hon’ble High Court answered the third question by holding that
the Facilitation Council did not lose its jurisdiction to proceed with and
pronounce the Arbitral Award, notwithstanding the approval of the
resolution plan by the National Company Law Tribunal under Section
31 of the IBC. The Hon’ble High Court reasoned that the Arbitral
proceedings had been initiated prior to the commencement of the
insolvency resolution process, and were kept in abeyance during the
period of moratorium, and were resumed after the lifting of the
moratorium. It was further observed that the approved resolution plan
merely determined the claim of the Respondent at nil value and did not,
by itself, render the arbitral proceedings without jurisdiction.
Accordingly, the Hon’ble High Court had dismissed the petition filed
by the Appellant and hence, the appeal was preferred before the
Hon’ble Supreme Court.
77.1. The relevant submissions on behalf of the parties, made before the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, for the purposes of the present petition are as under:-
“22. Learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that the High
Court had erroneously held that the resolution plan did not
determine the claim of the respondent at nil and, therefore, the
Facilitation Council had the jurisdiction to decide on the claim of
the respondent.
22.1. He submits that the High Court had misread and
misinterpreted the resolution plan which would be evident from a
perusal of the relevant paragraphs of the resolution plan.
Respondent had submitted its claim as an operational creditor to the
resolution professional. Such claim was the same claim which
formed the subject matter of the proceedings before the Facilitation
Council. Resolution applicant had submitted a resolution plan in
respect of the appellant (corporate debtor) in accordance with the
provisions of Section 30 of the IBC to enable the appellant to
continue as a going concern. A reading of the relevant paragraphs
of the resolution plan i.e. paragraphs 3.2(v), 3.4(ii) and 3.8(i) would
indicate that the claims of the operational creditors including the
debt of the respondent were settled at nil and, therefore, they were
not entitled to any payment.
*** *** ***
22.3. Learned senior counsel submits that on 17.04.2018 when the
NCLT had approved the resolution plan, claims of the operational
creditors were settled at nil. This became binding on the respondent
and all other authorities as per Section 31(1) of the IBC. In this
connection, learned senior counsel has referred to and relied upon
the decision of this Court in Ajay Kumar Radheshyam Goenka Vs.
Tourism Finance Corporation of India Ltd.1
 In the said decision,
this Court had made it abundantly clear that the creditor has no
option but to join the process under the IBC. Once the plan is
approved, it would bind everyone under the sun. He contended that
the respondent had submitted its claim before the resolution
professional but the same was not included in the resolution plan as
was approved by the committee of creditors and then by the
adjudicating authority i.e. NCLT which became binding on the
respondent. Even if the respondent had not submitted its claim
before the resolution professional, the approved resolution plan
would still have been binding on the respondent.
*** *** ***
23.4. Learned senior counsel for the respondent distinguished the
case of Ghanshyam Mishra (supra) by contending that the said
judgment was rendered in a distinguishable factual situation where
the creditor had failed to lodge its claim upon public announcement
by the resolution professional. Therefore, this Court held that such
a creditor cannot file its claim thereafter and such claim gets
extinguished. This judgment does not deal with claims filed before
the interim resolution professional or resolution professional and
not included in the resolution plan. High Court had noticed this fact
and has rightly observed that since the respondent does not fall in
the category of operational creditors whose claims were rendered
nil, there was no occasion for the respondent to challenge the
resolution plan.
*** *** ***
23.6 He has referred to various provisions of the IBC as well as to
the decision of this Court in Ghanshyam Mishra (supra) and
submits that imposition of moratorium and consequential approval
of resolution plan does not terminate or put an end to pending
proceedings but those were merely stayed. Legislature has not
provided that upon approval of a resolution plan, all pending
proceedings would get extinguished. Therefore, post expiry of the
moratorium period, pending proceedings such as arbitral
proceedings would stand revived and taken to their logical
conclusion.
23.7 Learned senior counsel submits that in the present case,
respondent had lodged its claim before the interim resolution
professional and had also informed about the pendency of
proceedings before the Facilitation Council. Interim resolution
professional had published an information memorandum on
20.10.2017 mentioning therein a list of claimants which did not
include operational creditors whose claims were sub-judiced
before different judicial fora. Validity of such claims would be
decided after the judicial proceedings were complete. He
submits that after lifting of moratorium, notices were duly
issued to the appellant by the Facilitation Council but the
appellant decided not to appear and contest the proceedings.
After the award was passed, appellant did not challenge the
same under Section 34 of the 1996 Act. Having not challenged
the award in the forum designated by law, he could not have
challenged the same by filing objections to the arbitral award in
a proceeding under Section 47 of the CPC. Learned counsel
asserts that Section 34 of the 1996 Act is the only acknowledged
remedy available to challenge an award. Appellant had the
opportunity to assail the award under Section 34 of the 1996 Act
but he did not do so. Therefore, filing of application to declare the
award a nullity in execution proceedings instituted by the
respondent for execution of the award is a clear abuse of the
process of law and was rightly rejected by the Executing Court
which decision has been upheld by the High Court. Learned
counsel further submits that since the claim of the respondent was
pending before the Facilitation Council and in view of the
information memorandum issued by the interim resolution
professional, there was no need for the respondent to have
challenged the resolution plan. Therefore, the High Court was fully
justified in rejecting the petition filed by the appellant under Article
227 of the Constitution of India. The appeal is devoid of any merit
and should, therefore, be dismissed.”
77.2. The Hon’ble Supreme Court after noticing the relevant provisions of
the IBC, judicial precedents and upon applying the same to the factual matrix
of the said case, observed and held as under: -
“35. Respondent had supplied telescopic and type mounted cranes,
75 ton crawler cranes, hydra and trailors on hiring basis to the
appellant pursuant to two purchase orders dated 02.06.2011 and
06.06.2011. Case No. 330 of 2014 pertains to 138 numbers of bills
under eight work orders in which the disputed amount was Rs.
1,36,69,981.33; on the other hand Case No. 331 of 2014 pertains to
158 numbers of bills under nine work orders where the disputed
amount was Rs. 22,39,233.00. Thus, the total disputed amount was
Rs. 1,59,09,214.33. Buyer (appellant) did not make any payment so
the entire amount was claimed as outstanding and due. Initially
conciliation proceedings were initiated by the Facilitation Council
but the buyer unit was not present though it had filed written
submissions stating that on the request of the supplier it had
appointed an arbitrator whereafter arbitration proceedings had
commenced. As an independent arbitration agreement existed
between the parties, Facilitation Council should not proceed under
Section 18(3) of the MSME Act. Already arbitration process was
going on as per the arbitration agreement. Facilitation Council in its
proceedings dated 31.07.2017 noted that it appeared from
newspaper reports and order copy of the NCLT that moratorium
was declared under Section 14 of IBC in the matter of State Bank of
India Vs. Electrosteel Steels Ltd. It was decided that the matter
should be kept in abeyance till the moratorium period was over.
36. We shall now deal with the resolution plan and revert back to
the proceedings of the Facilitation Council thereafter. The
resolution plan was submitted by Vedanta Ltd. as resolution
applicant and is dated 29.03.2018. Clause 3 contained the
mandatory contents of the resolution plan. Clause 3.2(v) declared
that while the liquidation value of the corporate debtor was Rs.
2,899.98 crores, the admitted debts of the financial creditors
aggregated to approximately Rs.13,395.25 crores. The liquidation
value was not sufficient to cover the debts of the financial creditors
in full. Therefore, the liquidation value of the operational creditors
or the other creditors or stakeholders of the corporate debtor
including dues of the employees (other than workmen), government
dues, taxes etc. and other creditors and stakeholders was nil. As
such, they would not be entitled to any payment. The dissenting
financial creditors would be entitled to receive 21.65 percent of the
value of their admitted debt which would be paid in priority to any
payment to the assenting financial creditors.
37. Clause 3.2(xii)(A) is relevant. It says that notwithstanding
what is contained in the mandatory contents of the resolution plan,
upon approval of the resolution plan by the NCLT under Section 31
of the IBC, on and from the effective date all pending proceedings
relating to the winding up of the company i.e. the corporate debtor
shall stand irrevocably and unconditionally abated in perpetuity and
claims in connection with all violation or breach of any agreement
by the corporate debtor shall be settled at nil value at par with
operational creditors.
38. Clause 3.4 provides for a proposal for operational creditors
(excluding employees and workmen). Sub-clause (ii) says that since
the liquidation value is not sufficient to cover the debts of the
financial creditors in full, therefore, the liquidation value of the
operational creditors or the other creditors etc. was taken as nil.
Thus nil payment was proposed under the resolution plan towards
claims of operational creditors whether filed or not, whether
admitted or not and whether or not set out in the provisional
balance sheet or the list of creditors etc. Thus, no source was
identified for such payment under the resolution plan.
39. Heading of Clause 3.8 is treatment of amounts claimed under
ongoing litigations. Clause 3.8(i) states that all claims arising out of
enquiries, investigations, notices, causes of action, suits, litigations,
arbitrations, claims of the top 30 operational creditors against the
corporate debtor in relation to any period prior to the effective date
etc. shall be settled at nil.
40. The resolution plan as submitted by Vedanta Ltd. was
examined by NCLT and by order dated 17.04.2018 approved the
same. It was mentioned in the said order that the resolution plan
had the approval of the committee of creditors with a voting share
of 100 percent. It was clarified that the moratorium order passed
under Section 14 IBC would cease to have effect as the approved
resolution plan had come into force with immediate effect.
Adjudicating authority i.e. NCLT declared that the approved
resolution plan would be binding on the corporate debtor, its
employees members, creditors, coordinators and stakeholders
involved in the resolution plan.
*** *** ***
50. In so far the second and third issues are concerned, it is by
now well settled that once a resolution plan is duly approved by
the adjudicating authority under sub-section (1) of Section 31,
all claims which are not part of the resolution plan shall stand
extinguished and no person will be entitled to initiate or
continue any proceeding in respect to a claim which is not part
of the resolution plan. In fact, this Court in Essar Steel India
Ltd. (supra) had categorically declared that a successful
resolution applicant cannot be faced with undecided claims
after the resolution plan is accepted. Otherwise, this would
amount to a hydra head popping up which would throw into
uncertainty the amount payable by the resolution applicant. In
so far the resolution plan is concerned, the resolution professional,
the committee of creditors and the adjudicating authority noted
about the claim lodged by the respondent in the arbitration
proceeding. However, the respondent was not included in the top
30 operational creditors whose claims were settled at nil. This can
only mean that the three authorities conducting the corporate
insolvency resolution process did not deem it appropriate to include
the respondent in the top 30 operational creditors. If the claims of
the top 30 operational creditors were settled at nil, it goes without
saying that the claim of the respondent could not be placed higher
than the said top 30 operational creditors. Moreover, the resolution
plan itself provides that all claims covered by any suit, cause of
action, arbitration etc. shall be settled at nil. Therefore, it is crystal
clear that in so far claim of the respondent is concerned, the same
would be treated as nil at par with the claims of the top 30
operational creditors.
50.1 Lifting of the moratorium does not mean that the claim of
the respondent would stand revived notwithstanding approval
of the resolution plan by the adjudicating authority.
Moratorium is intended to ensure that no further demands are
raised or adjudicated upon during the corporate insolvency
resolution process so that the process can be proceeded with
and concluded without further complications. View taken by the
High Court cannot be accepted in the light of the clear cut
provisions of the IBC as well as the law laid down by this Court. In
view of the resolution plan, as approved, the claim of the
respondent stood extinguished. Therefore, the Facilitation
Council did not have the jurisdiction to arbitrate on the said
claim. Since the award was passed without jurisdiction, the
same could be assailed in a proceeding under Section 47 CPC.
View taken by the High Court that because the appellant did
not challenge the award under Section 34 of the 1996 Act,
therefore, it was precluded from objecting to execution of the
award at the stage of Section 47 of CPC is wholly
unsustainable.
51. Consequently, the view taken by the High Court that
notwithstanding approval of the resolution plan by the NCLT,
the Facilitation Council did not lose jurisdiction to proceed and
pronounce the arbitral award, is erroneous and contrary to the
law laid down by this Court.
52. In that view of the matter, we have no hesitation to hold
that upon approval of the resolution plan by the NCLT, the
claim of the respondent being outside the purview of the
resolution plan stood extinguished. Therefore, the award dated
06.07.2018 is incapable of being executed. Consequently, the order
dated 03.03.2023 passed by the Presiding Officer, Commercial
Court/District Judge-1, Bokaro in Commercial Execution Case No.
21 of 2022 (Execution Case No. 77 of 2018) is hereby set aside.
Execution proceedings in Commercial Execution Case No. 21 of
2022 (Execution Case No. 77 of 2018) pending in the Court of
Presiding Officer, Commercial Court/District Judge-1, Bokaro, are
hereby quashed. Resultantly, impugned order of the High Court
dated 17.07.2023 is also set aside.”
(emphasis supplied)
78. In the present case, the RP, vide letter dated 30.07.2018 addressed to
Respondent No. 2, categorically stated that the treatment of the claims of
Respondent No. 2 would depend upon the terms of the Resolution Plan, as
may be approved. The Resolution Plan dealt with contingent liabilities in
terms of Clause 8.7, which reads as under: -
“8. 7. Treatment of Contingent Liabilities
In addition, Tata Steel understands that the Company has
recognized certain contingent liabilities towards certain persons in
the FY 17 Annual Financials aggregating to approximately ₹ 64.36
crores (Indian Rupees Sixty Four point Three Six Crore only).
Particulars of such contingent liabilities are set out in Part A of
Annexure 10 hereto, and set out in Part B of Annexure 10 hereto
are particulars of other potential contingent liabilities of the
Company. The matters set out in Annexure 10, together with all
other contingent liabilities of the Company (whether known or
unknown) until the Closing Date, are collectively the “Contingent
Liabilities”. Such Contingent Liabilities shall be treated as follows:
8.7.1. In respect of Contingent Liabilities which are in the
nature of financial debt or are towards Financial Creditors (for
instance any outstanding guarantees issued by the Financial
Creditors, counter guarantee by the Company in connection with
the letter(s) of credit), no further payments from the Resolution
Applicant shall be due in respect of any Contingent Liabilities
which are capable of being crystallised prior to the Closing Date.
Please refer to Section 8. I l.3(ii) regarding effect of the Plan on and
from the Closing Date with respect to guarantees provided by the
Company.
8.7.2. In respect of Contingent Liabilities which are in the
nature of operational debt or are towards Operational
Creditors, then to the extent that the same are capable of being
crystallized as of the Closing Date, each such Contingent
Liability is a "claim" and "debt'', each as defined under the
IBC, and would consequently qualify as "operational debt" (as
defined under the IBC) and therefore the full amount of such
Contingent Liability shall be deemed to be owed and due as of
the lnsolvency Commencement Date, the Liquidation Value of
which is assumed to be NIL, and therefore no amount is
payable in relation thereto.
8.7.3. In respect of Contingent Liabilities which are not in the
nature of financial debt or operational debt, or are towards Other
Creditors, then to the extent that the same have/are capable of being
crystallized as of the Closing Date, no amount shall be payable in
relation thereto as set out in Section 8.4.1 above.”
(emphasis supplied)
79. In the considered opinion of this Court, the claim of the Petitioner was
duly considered and dealt with in the Resolution Plan. It is also observed that
the Resolution Plan categorically deals with sub judice matters in the
following manner: -
“8.6.2. In respect of Sub Judice Claims from Operational
Creditors (including without limitation, claims made by ISGEC
Heavy Engineering Limited), each such Sub Judice Claim is a
"claim" and "debt", each as defined under the IBC, and would
consequently qualify as "operational debt" (as defined under
the TBC) and therefore the full amount of such Sub Judice
Claims shall be deemed to be owed and due as of the Insolvency
Commencement Date, the Liquidation Value of which is
assumed to be NIL, and therefore no amount is payable in
relation thereto. Please also refer to Section 8.2.1 (iii) regarding
additional claims from Operational Creditors relating to a period
prior to the Insolvency Commencement Date and Section 8.
10.12(iv) regarding no claims being initiated by the Operational
Creditors during the period from the Effective Date until the
Closing Date.”
(emphasis supplied)
80. Thus, even if the claim of the Respondent No. 2 was considered to be
contingent in terms of the communications dated 17.04.2018 and 30.07.2018
by the RP, the fact that their said claims were duly considered and rejected in
the Resolution Plan, which was ultimately approved by the Adjudicating
Authority, is a matter of record.
81. The order relied upon by learned counsel for Respondent No. 2 in
Adani Power Limited (supra), cannot be of any assistance, in as much as the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, while passing the said order, clearly observed as
under: -
“3. However, the claim even if allowed in favour of M/s
Shapoorji Pallonji and Co. Pvt. Ltd. will have no bearing on the
rights and obligations of the appellant - M/s. Adani Power Limited,
which are in terms of the Resolution Plan. It has been held by the
judgment dated 23.02.2023, that the appellant cannot be saddled
with any liability except what is mentioned in the Resolution Plan.”
82. Thus, it is noted that the Hon’ble Supreme Court reiterated the
principle of law, that once a Resolution Plan has been approved, no further
claims can be raised or pursued with respect to the corporate debtor.
83. Furthermore, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Essar Steel India Limited
(supra) reiterated that a successful resolution applicant cannot be made to
face undecided claims after the Resolution Plan is approved. It was further
held therein that lifting of moratorium would not mean that the claim would
stand revived notwithstanding the approval of such a plan by the Adjudicating
Authority. As already noted, the Respondent therein, despite having filed a
claim as an operational creditor, had its claim treated as nil in the Resolution
Plan, at par with the claims of other operation creditors. In the said judgment
it was further noted that since the liquidation value was insufficient to cover
the debts of financial creditors in full, the liquidation value of the operational
creditors was taken as nil. In the present case, it is pointed out by the learned
Senior Counsel for the Petitioner that as per order dated 30.05.2019 passed by
the learned Adjudicating Authority in CA No. 929(PB)/2018, the total debt
upon the Petitioner was to the tune of INR 2878 Crores and the liquidation
value of the Petitioner was INR 721 Crores.
84. The contention advanced on behalf of the Respondent No. 2, which was
approved by the learned Arbitral Tribunal, was that since RP failed to classify
it as an operational creditor/financial creditor or a creditor, it was effectively
removed from the CIRP, which was confirmed by the RP in his
communications dated 17.04.2018 and 30.07.2018. It was contended that the
claim of Respondent No. 2 was classified as a “contingent liability”, and
therefore, the Resolution Plan could not have dealt with a future liability. In
these circumstances, it was contended that the Petitioner’s Resolution Plan,
insofar as it sought treatment of claim of Respondent No. 2 as an operational
debt due in praesenti and thereafter proceeded to reduce the same to nil, was
not permissible in law. It was further contended that a “contingent creditor” is
no creditor in the eyes of law, and, on such a classification, the Respondent
No. 2 was removed from the CIRP, and therefore, the Resolution Plan would
not be binding on it.
85. At this stage, it would be apposite to refer to the judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Kalyani Trasport (supra). In the said case, the
Resolution Professional had admitted the claim raised by the Appellant
therein, as an Operational Creditor of the Corporate Debtor. However, after
admission of the claim, the Resolution Professional had classified the
Appellant as a contingent creditor and the said classification was duly
approved by the CoC, who had the power to sanction the Resolution Plan or
to enter into negotiations to modify it by its approval. It was held that such a
decision would squarely fall under the protected umbrella of “commercial
wisdom” of the CoC, and after considering the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in K. Shasidhar (supra), it was held as under: -
“179. It can thus be seen that this court has held that the
Legislature purposefully did not include a means to challenge
the commercial wisdom exercised by the CoC. This makes a
challenge to the same non-justiciable. It has been further held
that a challenge cannot be raised against the decision making of
the CoC unless and until the grounds for challenge as given in
the Code are satisfied. Any interference in the paramount
objective of the CoC of exercising its commercial wisdom would
amount to the court rewriting the law and going against the
very objectives of the IBC.”
(emphasis supplied)
86. In the present case, as already noted hereinabove, the Resolution Plan
in Clause no. 8.6.2, has duly considered the sub-judice claim of Respondent
No. 2, and has duly noted that the sub-judice claim is a “claim” and “debt”, as
defined in the IBC, and would consequently qualify as “operational debt.”
This, as per record, was duly approved by the CoC, and subsequent approval
was granted by the Adjudicating Authority. It is also pertinent to note that
TSL had submitted its Resolution Plan to the RP on 11.06.2018, and on
01.09.2018 an amended and restated Resolution Plan was submitted based
upon negotiations and consultation with CoC and RP. It is only thereafter on
30.07.2018, a letter was sent by RP as noted hereinbefore, wherein it was
stated that the claim of Respondent No. 2 cannot be treated as a crystallised
liability and can only be treated as a “contingent liability”. In the said letter, it
was clearly stated and informed to Respondent No. 2 that the treatment of
contingent liability in the Resolution Plan will be entirely up to the said
resolution applicant and subject to the decision of CoC while considering the
Resolution Plan in accordance with law. Thus, in these circumstances there
was a full disclosure, and Respondent No. 2 was put to notice of the same.
The Petitioner had contended that subsequent to the approval of the
Resolution Plan by the Adjudicating Authority, Respondent No. 2 had
preferred an appeal against the same before the learned NCLAT, under the
provisions of the IBC, however, in the Counter Affidavit filed by Respondent
No. 2 the same is denied and it is averred that no appeal is pending before the
learned NCLAT. Thus, the Resolution Plan had attained finality and would be
binding in terms of Section 31(1) of the IBC.
87. Insofar as the objection with regard to the maintainability of the present
petition is concerned, useful reference can be made to the decisions of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Deep Industries (supra), Punjab State Power
Corporation (supra) and decision of this Court in Surender Kumar Singal
(supra), wherein it has been held that the Court can exercise jurisdiction
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, 1950, against an
order passed by an Arbitral Tribunal, if such order is completely perverse, or
is patently lacking in inherent jurisdiction. In the present case, in view of the
Resolution Plan being approved by the Adjudicating Authority, the claim of
Respondent No. 2 stood extinguished, and therefore, in terms of the judgment
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Electrosteel (supra), the learned Arbitral
Tribunal did not have the jurisdiction to proceed further with the adjudication
of the said claim.
88. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the impugned order dated
07.10.2020 is hereby set aside. The arbitral proceedings before the learned
Arbitral Tribunal stands terminated.
89. The present petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
90. Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
91. Judgment be uploaded on the website of this Court, forthwith.