COURT: HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
CASE_TYPE: ARBITRATION
CASE_NO: FAO(OS)(COMM) 292/2018
DATE: 24.12.2025
PLAINTIFF: DELHI AIRPORT METRO EXPRESS PRIVATE LIMITED (INDIA)
DEFENDENT: CONSTRUCCIONES Y AUXILIAR DE FERROCARRILES & ANR.
JUDGE: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE C. HARI SHANKAR, HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE OM PRAKASH SHUKLA

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This is an appeal filed under Section 37(1)(c) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 19961, read with Section 13 of the Commercial
Courts Act, challenging the impugned order dated 25.10.2018 passed
by the learned Single Judge of this Court in the OMP (Comm.)
bearing No. 7/2017 titled Delhi Airport Metro Express Private Limited
(India) v. Construcciones Y Auxiliar De Ferrocarriles & Anr. By the
said order, the learned Single Judge had dismissed the Section 34
petition filed by appellant under Section 34 of the Act, on the ground
of lack of jurisdiction, holding therein that Part I of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 was inapplicable.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
2. The brief factual matrix necessary for the purposes of
adjudication of the present appeal is delineated below.
3. The appellant is a company duly incorporated and registered
under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. The Respondent
No. 1 is a foreign company and the Respondent No. 2 is its wholly
owned Indian subsidiary.
4. Respondent no. 1 and Reliance Infrastructure Limited (RIL)2
had jointly participated in the bid for the Airport Metro Express Line
Project, which connects the Indira Gandhi International Airport, New
Delhi with the city of New Delhi. In this regard, Respondent no. 1 and
RIL entered into a Memorandum of Understanding3 dated 24.03.2007,
followed by a Consortium Agreement dated 09.10.2007. Their bid was
successful, and consequently, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
(DMRC)4 awarded the project to the consortium vide a Letter of
Acceptance dated 21.01.2008.
2 “RIL” hereinafter
3 “MoU” hereinafter
5. Pursuant thereto, Respondent No. l and RIL incorporated the
Appellant company as a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for the partial
implementation and subsequent operation of the project. RIL held
95% of the equity shares in the SPV-Appellant company, while
Respondent No.1 held the remaining 5%.
6. In furtherance of the requirement of the project, the appellant
and Respondent No. l entered into two agreements dated 30.06.2008,
namely: (i) the Rolling Stock Supply Contract,5 and (ii) the
Maintenance Services Agreement (MSA)6. Clause 22 of the Supply
contract and Clause 14 of the MSA provided for resolution of disputes
through arbitration. The aforesaid Clauses read as follows
respectively:
Clause 22 of Supply Contract:
"22.1 In case of disputes, the Parties hereby agree to exhaust all
informal senior level determination mechanisms before submitting
a request to settle them under the formal dispute resolution system.
22.2 Any dispute arising in connection with the interpretation or
performance of this Contract shall be finally settled by arbitration
under the rules of the International Chamber of Commerce, Paris
("ICC"). The arbitration tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators.
One arbitrator shall be nominated by each of the Parties, and the
third arbitrator shall be a person nationality and origin other than
India or Span [sic], and shall be appointed by the ICC in
accordance with the "Rules of the ICC as Appointing Authority in
UNCITRAL or Adhoc Arbitration Proceedings".
22.3 The seat of the arbitration shall be London and the language
of the arbitration shall be English.
22.4 Continuation of performance: Pending final resolution of any
dispute, the Parties shall continue to perform their respective
obligations hereunder.
5“Supply contract” hereinafter
22.5 Governing Law & Jurisdiction:
22.5.1 This contract shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of India.
22.6 Survival
22. 6.1 It is expressly stated herein that the provisions of this
Article 22 shall survive termination or expiry of this Contract. "
Article 14 of the Maintenance Contract reads as follows:
"DISPUTE RESOLUTION
14.1 In case of disputes, the Parties hereby agree to exhaust all
informal senior level determination mechanisms before submitting
a request to settle them under the formal dispute resolution system.
14.2 Any dispute arising in connection with the interpretation or
performance of this Contract shall be finally settled by arbitration
under the rules of the International Chamber of Commerce, Paris
("ICC"). The arbitration tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators.
One arbitrator shall be nominated by each of the Parties, and the
third arbitrator shall be a person nationality and origin other than
India or Spain, and shall be appointed by the ICC in accordance
with the "Rules of the ICC as Appointing Authority in UNCITRAL
or Adhoc Arbitration Proceedings".
14.3 The arbitration shall take place in London and the language
of the arbitration shall be English.
14.4 The parties expressly exclude the application of Part 1 of the
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
14.5 Continuation of performance Pending final resolution of any
dispute, the Parties shall continue to perform their respective
obligations hereunder.
14. 6 Governing Law & Jurisdiction:
14. 6.1 This contract shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of India.
14. 7 Survival
14. 7.1 It is expressly stated herein that the provisions of this
7. Subsequently, by an Assignment Agreement dated 17.05.2010,
Respondent No.1 assigned its obligations under the Maintenance
Services Agreement to Respondent No.2.
8. In the interregnum, Respondent No.1 had also issued a
Performance Bank Guarantee dated 20.08.2008 in favour of the
Appellant, in furtherance of the contractual arrangements between the
parties.
9. However, during the performance of the contract, certain
difficulties arose, leading to disputes between the parties due to some
technicalities.
10. On 16.07.2013, the Appellant notified Respondent No. l of its
intention to invoke the Performance Bank Guarantee on the ground of
the Respondent’s alleged failure to cure the stated defects. Respondent
No.1 in response approached this Court under Section 9 of the Act,
seeking restraint on invocation of the said Performance Bank
Guarantee. However, the Section 9 petition was dismissed by this
Court vide order dated 17.01.2014. An appeal filed against the said
dismissal was subsequently withdrawn and dismissed as such.
11. Consequently, the Appellant encashed the Performance Bank
Guarantee for an amount of Euro 4,761,963.50/- on 20.01.2014.
12. In the meantime, the Concession Agreement with DMRC stood
Article 22 of the Supply Contract and Article 14 of the Maintenance
Services Agreement (MSA) in respect of their claims, inter alia,
alleging wrong encashment of the Performance Bank Guarantee.
Pursuant thereto, an Arbitral Tribunal was constituted to adjudicate
upon the disputes between the parties.
13. Aggrieved by the initiation of the arbitral proceedings, the
Appellant filed an anti-arbitration Injunction suit before this Court
seeking a stay of the arbitration proceedings pending in London. The
said suit, however came to be dismissed vide judgement dated
14.08.2014.
ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS
PARTIAL AWARD ON JURISDICTION (MAJORITY
OPINION)
14. Consequently, the arbitral proceedings continued, and prior to
adjudicating the substantive dispute, the Arbitral Tribunal rendered a
partial award on jurisdiction.
15. Before the learned Arbitral Tribunal, the Appellant contended
that pursuant to the assignment agreement, under which Respondent
No.1 assigned its obligations to Respondent No.2, the Respondent
No.2 had stepped into the shoes of Respondent No.1. It was therefore
companies and, as such, the arbitration was required to be seated and
conducted in India.
16. The Respondents denied this contention, asserting that the MSA
was not an agreement between two Indian companies. It was further
contended that, even assuming arguendo that the MSA was between
two Indian companies, the arbitration proceedings could not be held in
India.
17. The Arbitral Tribunal held that the MSA was not an agreement
between two Indian companies and that Respondent No.1 continued to
remain a party to the MSA. The Arbitral Tribunal observed that the
MSA expressly permitted Respondent No.1 to assign or sub-contract
its obligations to any wholly owned subsidiary without the
Appellant’s consent. Further, the assignment agreement expressly
stipulated that Respondent No.1 would remain responsible and liable
for all obligations under the MSA.
18. Accordingly, the jurisdictional objection raised by Appellant
was rejected, and the Tribunal held that it had jurisdiction to
adjudicate the claims arising under both, the Supply Contract and the
MSA.
19. It is pertinent to note that no costs were imposed in this partial
award. A separate partial award dealing with the costs of the
jurisdictional challenge was subsequently rendered, which we shall
PARTIAL AWARD ON COSTS OF JURISDICTIONAL
CHALLENGE
20. The Respondents argued that, pursuant to Article 37(3) of the
International Chamber of Commerce Arbitration Rules, 20217, the
Arbitral Tribunal was vested with the authority to award costs and
that, in accordance with Section 61(2) of the English Arbitration Act
1996, costs should follow the event in the absence of any agreement to
the contrary or exceptional circumstances.
21. The respondents further contended that the present matter was a
textbook case for ordering the losing party to bear the prevailing
party’s costs. In this regard, they relied on the Appellant’s conduct
before the Tribunal, including its insistence on an oral hearing despite
having nothing new to add beyond its written submissions, as well as
the fact that the Tribunal had rejected the Appellant’s jurisdictional
objection in unequivocal terms. On this basis, the Respondents sought
recovery of £97,004.05 in legal fees incurred in responding to the
Appellant’s jurisdictional challenge.
22. The Appellant, on the other hand, argued that even if the
Tribunal were inclined to award costs, it could do so only after the
conclusion of the hearing on merits. According to the Appellant, the
“event” to which costs should attach refers to the final determination
of the arbitration, and the Tribunal would be better positioned &
acquainted at that stage to assess costs in the context of the
proceedings as a whole.
23. The appellant maintained that costs could only be awarded only
once it was determined which party ultimately prevailed. It further
submitted that deferring a decision on costs was particularly
appropriate in the present case, as it believed it had a strong case on
the merits. While acknowledging that Article 37(3) of the ICC Rules
grants tribunals the discretion to award costs at any stage of the
proceedings, the Appellant argued that Tribunals rarely exercise this
power at a preliminary stage and that the jurisdictional costs should
not be awarded on a “pay-as-you-go” basis.
24. The Tribunal, relying on Article 37 of the ICC Rules, held that
it had the power to award costs at the present stage of the proceedings.
It further held that, having successfully defeated the Appellant’s
jurisdictional objection, the respondents were, in principle, entitled to
recover the costs incurred in that regard. The Tribunal observed that
its decision in the final award would not alter the fact that the
Appellant’s jurisdictional objections were unjustified. Accordingly,
the Tribunal ordered the Appellant to pay costs in the amount of
£80,000/- to the Respondents.
FINAL AWARD (MAJORITY OPINION)
25. The Respondents’ claim before the Tribunal was that the
addition, they sought payment of the amounts secured under the bank
guarantees. The respondents challenged the retention on the ground
that Article 12 of the Supply Contract precluded the Appellant from
claiming any remedy for breach of specification. It was further
contended that, even assuming a breach, the Appellant had suffered no
loss.
26. The Appellant, in response, submitted that Article 12 was
irrelevant to its claim for damages and that the Respondents had
breached the internal noise specifications prescribed under the Supply
Contract. On the issue of damages, the Appellant contended that
damages were payable notwithstanding the assumption that no actual
loss had been incurred.
27. Against this backdrop of the rival submissions, the Arbitral
Tribunal framed three sub-questions for determination:
(i) Do the provisions of Article 12 of the Supply Contract preclude
Respondent from claiming damages for breach of specifications?
(ii) Did the rolling-stock supplied by Claimant No. 1 pursuant to the
Supply Contract satisfy the requirements of that contract?
(iii) If so, what compensation should be awarded to Respondent?
28. With respect to the first sub-question, the Respondent No. 1
contended that its obligations under Article 12.4 of the Supply
Contract were limited to the repair or replacement of faulty or
the warranty period. It was further argued that Article 12.2 required
the Appellant to provide written notice of any warranty claim within
15 days of discovering the defect, along with the information specified
under Article 12.3. According to the Respondents, no such notice was
ever furnished in relation to the alleged noise issue.
29. The appellant countered these submissions by asserting that its
claim was founded under section 12 of the Sale of Goods Act and not
under Article 12 of the Supply Contract. It further contended that, on a
plain reading, Article 12 governed defects arising after the issuance of
the Provisional Acceptance Certificate, whereas the defects in
question has arisen prior thereto. Consequently, the Respondents
remained liable.
30. The Arbitral Tribunal accepted the Appellant’s submissions on
the first sub-question and held that Article 12 created warranty
obligations for Respondent No.1 only in relation of defects arising
after the issuance of the Provisional Acceptance Certificate, and not
for defects occurring prior to it.
31. On the second sub-question, the Respondents argued that the
noise level specifications contained in the Supply Contract were
ambiguous and that such ambiguity ought to be resolved by reference
32. The Respondents also disputed the testing methodology and
submitted that the noise testing ought to have been conducted under
free field conditions.
33. The Appellant, on the other hand, submitted that there was no
ambiguity whatsoever in the contractual specifications relating to
noise levels. It was further argued that extrinsic evidence
demonstrated a clear and mutual intention of the parties that noise
testing would be conducted under real operating conditions rather than
under free field conditions.
34. The Tribunal rejected the Respondents’ contention that the
specifications pertaining to noise levels were ambiguous. It further
held that the vehicles supplied by the Respondents failed to comply
with the contractual specifications and, consequently, did not satisfy
the requirements of the Supply Contract.
35. With respect to the third sub-question, the Respondents
submitted that even assuming a breach of the noise level
specifications, the Appellant had not suffered any financial loss and
had failed to adduce any evidence to substantiate such loss. In
response, the Appellants argued that, had it been aware of the
Respondents’ inability to supply goods of the requisite standard, it
would have negotiated the contract with a different party on different
36. The Appellant further contended that the amount withheld
under the Performance Bank Guarantee represented a reasonable
quantification of the diminution in price arising from the breach. In
support of this contention, the Appellant relied on Section 14 of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986, which prescribes a minimum
compensation of 5% of the value of defective goods, as well as Article
14 of the Supply Contract, which provided for liquidated damages in
the event of delay.
37. Additionally, the Appellant submitted that the law does not
require damages to be proved with mathematical precision and that the
mere difficulty in quantifying damages cannot preclude recovery.
Reliance was placed on Section 59(1) of the Sale of Goods Act, which
provides that where goods fail to conform to warranted specifications,
the buyer is entitled to claim a reduction in price for breach of
warranty.
38. The Tribunal, however, observed that the Appellant had failed
to produce any evidence demonstrating actual loss or diminution in
value. It held that proof of damage was a prerequisite for the grant of
compensation and that, in the absence of such proof, the Appellant
was not entitled to retain any amount under the Performance Bank
Guarantee.
39. Accordingly, despite holding that Respondent No.1 has failed to
comply with the requirements of the Supply Contract, the Tribunal
proceeds of the Performance Bank Guarantee. The Tribunal therefore
passed its final award in favour of the Respondents and directed the
Appellant to refund a sum of £4,761,963.50, which had been
recovered by encashment of the said Guarantee.
IMPUGNED ORDER
40. Aggrieved by the arbitral award, the Appellant filed a Section
34 petition before the learned Single Judge of this Court, challenging
(i) the final award dated 22.08.2016; (ii) the partial award on
jurisdiction dated 02.02.2015; and (iii) the partial award on costs out
of the jurisdictional challenge dated 15.12.2015.
41. The learned Single Judge dismissed the aforesaid petition on the
ground that it was not maintainable and further held that Part I of the
Act was inapplicable to the facts of the present case. The findings of
the learned Single Judge are summarised as below.
42. The learned Single Judge relying upon the decisions of the
Supreme Court in Bharat Aluminium Company v. Kaiser Aluminium
Technical Services Inc.8, Union of India v. Reliance Industries Ltd &
Ors.9 and Union of India v. Hardy Exploration10, held that the
Appellant’s reliance on National Thermal Power Corporation Vs.
8(2012) 9 SCC 552; “BALCO” hereinnafter
9(2015) 10 SCC 213
Singer Company & Ors.11 and Sumitomo Heavy Industries Ltd. Vs.
ONGC ltd12 was misplaced.
43. The learned Single Judge further relied upon the decision in
Roger Shashoua & Ors. v. Mukesh Sharma & Ors.13 to hold that a
distinction between the “seat” and “venue” of arbitration does exist,
and that the determination of the juridical seat must be made on a
consideration of the facts and circumstances of each case.
44. Further, it was opined that the facts of the present case were
identical to those in Roger Shashoua (supra), since in both cases
London was stipulated as the place of arbitration, the arbitral
proceedings were governed by the ICC Rules, and Indian law
governed the substantive contract. Accordingly, it was held that, in
respect of both the Supply Contract and the MSA, London constituted
the juridical seat of arbitration.
45. The Court also emphasized that Part I of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996stood expressly excluded. Therefore, following
the decision in Roger Shashoua (supra), it concluded that London is
the juridical seat of arbitration, and that the English courts alone had
jurisdiction over any supervisory or setting-aside proceedings relating
to the awards.
11 (1992) 3 SCC551
12 (1994) 1LLR45
46. While addressing the coexistence of Bhatia International vs
Bulk Trading S.A & Anr.14 and BALCO (supra), the learned Single
Judge observed that the ruling in BALCO was expressly prospective,
in as much as agreements executed after September 6, 2012, would be
governed by BALCO, whereas agreements executed prior thereto
would continue to be governed by the BHATIA regime.
47. In the present case, since, the Supply and Maintenance
Contracts herein were executed on 30.06.2008, the Court held that the
BHATIA principle would apply. However, it was further observed
that even under BHATIA, Part I of the Act would apply to a foreign-
seated arbitration only in the absence of an express or implied
exclusion. In the instant case, the Court found that Part I stood
expressly excluded.
48. The learned Single Judge underscored that the designation of
London as the seat/place of arbitration, read in conjunction with the
ICC Rules and the explicit exclusion of Part I in the MSA,
unequivocally demonstrated the parties’ intention to exclude Part I of
the Act in respect of both contracts.
49. On this basis, the learned Single Judge held that Part I of the
Act was inapplicable to the arbitral proceedings in question, both by
virtue of express agreement and by necessary implication arising from
the choice of a foreign seat. Consequently, it was held that a challenge
under Section 34 of the Act was not maintainable before an Indian
court in respect of awards rendered in these London-seated ICC
arbitrations.
50. The learned Single Judge, therefore, concluded that the Court
lacked jurisdiction to entertain the petition and dismissed the Section
34 challenge as not maintainable, without examining into the merits of
the arbitral awards.
51. Aggrieved by the above impugned order, the Appellant has
approached this Court by way of the present appeal under Section
37(1)(c) of the Act.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT
52. Notice in the present appeal was issued vide order dated
10.11.2019. The parties were heard at length, and the matter was
reserved for orders vide order dated 05.08.2025.
RIVAL SUBMISSIONS
53. Mr. Anirudh Bakhru, learned counsel for the Appellant
submitted that Article 22 of the Supply Contract contains the Dispute
Resolution Clause, the provisions of which are materially different
from the Dispute Resolution Clause contained in the MSA. It was
pointed out that Article 14.4 of the MSA expressly excludes the
(“A&C Act”), whereas no such exclusion is found in the Supply
Contract.
54. It was further submitted that both agreements were executed
prior to 06.09.2012 and, therefore, are governed by the legal position
prevailing at that time, as laid down by the Supreme Court in Bhatia
International v. Bulk Trading S.A and Another15 (2002). In
BHATIA (supra), the Supreme Court clarified that Part I of the A&C
Act would apply to international commercial arbitrations seated
outside India, unless its applicability was expressly or impliedly
excluded by the parties.
55. Mr. Bakhru contended that the parties have always been ad-
idem with respect to the applicability of Part I of the A&C Act to
disputes arising under the Supply Contract. In support of this
submission, it was pointed out that Respondent No. 1 had itself filed a
petition under Section 9 of the A&C Act before the learned Single
Judge of this Court in OMP No. 695/2013, seeking an injunction
against the encashment of the Bank Guarantee. He further pointed out
that in the said petition, the Respondent No. 1 categorically asserted
that this Court has territorial jurisdiction and the petition was
adjudicated on merits and ultimately dismissed. It was thus
emphasized that the Respondent's own conduct unequivocally
demonstrated that Article 22 of the Supply Contract was intended to
be governed by Part I of the A&C Act. Reliance in this regard was
placed on Godhra Electricity Co. Ltd. v. State of Gujarat 16.
56. It was submitted that the legal position prevailing in 2013, when
Respondent No.1 filed the Section 9 petition, made it amply clear that
an application under Section 9 could be maintained only before the
Court of the Seat. Consequently, having consciously invoked Section
9 jurisdiction before this Court, the Respondent cannot now be
permitted to approbate and reprobate by contending that Part I of the
Act would not apply.
57. Our attention was drawn to Article 26.6 of the Supply Contract,
which expressly excludes any terms implied by law. It was argued
that, in view of this provision, the Learned Single erred in holding that
Part I of the A&C Act stood impliedly excluded from the Supply
Contract.
58. It was further submitted that, in the facts and circumstances of
the case, as mandated by law, the use of the term "seat" in Clause 22.3
of the Supply Contract did not constitute a stipulation of the juridical
seat of arbitration, but merely denoted a convenient and neutral venue
for conducting the arbitral proceedings. It was further contended that
London was only a convenient venue and not the juridical seat of
arbitration, and that the Respondent is therefore estopped from
contending that Part I of the A&C Act stands excluded.
59. It was further argued that, had the parties intended to exclude
Part-I of the Act, they would have done so expressly. In this regard, it
was pointed out that on the very same day the Supply Contract was
executed, the parties also entered into another agreement, namely the
Maintenance Services Agreement (“MSA”). The MSA contained a
similar arbitration agreement clause; however, with one material
distinction, there was an express exclusion of Part I of the Act. It was
therefore submitted that if the parties intended to exclude Part I in the
arbitration clause contained in the Supply Contract as well, they
would have been expressly provided for such exclusion, as they had
done in the MSA. Learned counsel for the Appellant emphasized that
the absence of such an exclusion in the Supply Contract clearly
demonstrate that the Parties did not intend to exclude Part I of the Act.
60. It was also submitted that, in the present case, the closest and
most real connection to the performance of the Contract is in India,
because: (i) both the Supply Contract and the Maintenance Agreement
were executed in New Delhi; (ii) The Rolling Stock was required to be
commissioned in Delhi pursuant to a Tender issued by the Delhi
Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC); and (iii) the Rolling Stock was to be
used exclusively for the Delhi Airport Metro Express Line, situated in
Delhi, India.
61. Reliance was placed on judgement of the English Court in
Braes of Doune Wind Farm (Scotland) Limited v. Alfred McAlpine
Business Services Limited 17wherein the arbitration agreement
stipulated Glasgow, Scotland as the “seat” of arbitration, while
English law was the governing law of the arbitration. The Court held
that, in those circumstances, the term "seat" was not indicative of the
juridical seat but merely denoted the venue of arbitration, and that the
juridical seat was England. Consequently, a petition for annulment of
the arbitral award was held to be maintainable before the English
courts.
62. It was contended that the common and shared understanding of
the Parties until the filing of the Section 34 Petition by the Appellant,
was that Part 1 of the Act was applicable and had not been excluded,
and that the "juridical seat” of arbitration was not outside India but in
Delhi, being the place where the Contract was entered into and was to
be substantially & materially performed.
63. It was contended that Section 42 of the Act clarifies that once
an application with respect to an arbitration agreement under Part I is
made before a court, that court alone would have exclusive
jurisdiction over all arbitral proceedings and all subsequent
applications arising out of that agreement. Thus, it was contended that
a petition under section 9 of the A& C Act was filed by the
Respondent No.1 even before the constitution and initiation of the
Arbitral Proceedings, this court has very much the territorial
Jurisdiction to entertain the subsequent proceedings (read section 34
64. Lastly, it was urged that since the contract explicitly stipulated
that Indian law would govern the arbitration agreement, the provisions
of Part I of the Act would necessarily apply. It was contended that
where parties expressly choose the law governing the arbitration
agreement, the seat of arbitration does not determine the law
governing the arbitral process, rather, the seat operates merely as the
physical venue of arbitration and does not determine the lex arbitri.
Reliance in this regard was placed on Enercon (India) Ltd. v.
Enercon GMBH & Anr18, and Disortho S.A.S v. Meril Life
Sciences Pvt Ltd19.
65. Per contra, Mr. Shanatanu Tyagi, learned counsel for the
Respondents, submitted that the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal
flowed from Article 22 of the Supply Contract and Article 14 of the
MSA. He submitted that Article 22 of the Supply Contract expressly
provided that: (i) the seat of arbitration shall be London; and (ii) the
law governing the conduct of arbitration shall be the ICC Rules. He
further pointed out that, similarly, Article 14 of the MSA
contemplated that: (i) the arbitration would be governed by the ICC
Rules; (ii) the arbitration shall take place in London; and (iii) the Part-
I of the Act stood expressly excluded. It was further pointed out that
while both Agreements stipulated that Indian law would govern the
substantive contract, the procedural law of arbitration was
contractually governed by the agreed arbitral framework.
18(2014) 5 SCC 1
66. Mr. Tyagi submitted that the arbitral tribunal had correctly and
harmoniously construed the dispute resolution clauses, in accordance
with the contractual intent of the Parties. In support of this
submission, he highlighted that: (i) the MSA was executed in
furtherance of and contemporaneously with the Supply Contract; (ii)
the execution of the MSA as well as the Assignment Agreement was
intrinsically and inextricably linked to the Supply Contract, as
evidenced by express incorporation and repeated references thereto;
(iii) the effectiveness of the MSA was contingent upon achievement of
the Commercial Operation Date (COD) under the Supply Contract;
(iv) the maintenance services under the MSA were required to be
performed exclusively in relation to the rolling stocks supplied under
the Supply Contract; and (v) fault rectification timelines under the
MSA were aligned with schedules contained in the Supply Contract
(Article 4.6, MSA), and site access obligations were dependent upon
delivery schedule under the Supply Contract. Therefore, it was his
contention that the dispute resolution clauses in the Agreements must
necessarily be construed holistically and harmonious, particularly
where allegations of inconsistency are raised.
67. Mr. Tyagi further challenged the Appellants reliance on Clause
26.6 to contend that no implied exclusion of Part I could be read into
the agreement. He submitted that such an interpretation was
misplaced, as entire agreement clauses do not ipso facto prohibit the
implication of terms, especially those necessarily implied in law to
give effect to the express terms of the contract. He contended that
of the Act, as doing so would fall outside the express scope of the
dispute resolution mechanism under the Supply Contract and would
lead to interpretative anomalies. It further argued that entire agreement
clauses pertain to the subject matter of the contract and cannot be
extended to override or reconfigure the arbitration clause, especially
where the latter reflects a clear and deliberate procedural choice.
Reliance was placed on Ng Giap Hon v. Westcomb Securities Pte Ltd
Singapore Court of Appeal20.
68. The learned counsel for the Respondent submitted that in Union
of India v. Reliance Industries Limited & Ors21 it was held that Part-I
of the Act stands excluded by ‘necessary implication’ where either: (i)
the juridical seat of arbitration is outside India, which is expressly the
position under the Supply Contract in the present case; OR (ii) the law
governing the arbitration agreement is not Indian law.
69. He further placed reliance on Eitzen Bulk A/S v. Ashapura
Minechem Ltd.22 where the Apex Court, following the ratio in
RELIANCE II (supra), held that: (i) where Part I is excluded, no
Indian court would have jurisdiction to entertain objections to the
arbitral award under Section 34 of the Act; and (ii) the mere
designation of a juridical seat of arbitration attracts, ipso jure, the law
of that seat,, and it is not necessary for the parties to separately specify
the law governing the arbitral proceedings.
20[2009] 3 SLR(R) 518
21[(2015) 10 SCC 213] ; “Reliance II” hereinafter
70. Reliance was also placed on Arif Azim Co. Ltd. V Micromax
Informatic FZE23, wherein it was held that for arbitration agreements
prior to BALCO (supra), Part-I of the Act would apply only if: (i) the
seat of arbitration is in India; OR (ii) the arbitration agreement is
governed by Indian law. He further pointed out that even where the
substantive law of the contract is expressly stipulated, such stipulation
cannot be construed to mean that the law governing the arbitration
agreement or by extension, the seat of arbitration will be the same as
the substantive law of the contract.
71. Mr. Tyagi, submitted that Article 22.3 of the Supply Contract
unequivocally designates London as the seat of arbitration. Article
14.3 of the MSA, which specifies London as the place of arbitration,
must therefore be construed as confirmatory of London being the
juridical seat, rather than a mere venue. In any event, it was contended
that while the Supply Contract expressly designates London as the
seat of arbitration, the MSA explicitly excludes the application of Part
I of the Act, thereby reinforcing the intention of the parties.
72. He further relied on BGS SGS SOMA JV v. NHPC LTD24.
wherein the Apex Court laid down a three-condition test for
determining when a ‘venue’ may be construed as the ‘seat’ of
arbitration. The Supreme Court held that such construction would
follow where: (i) the arbitration agreement designates or mention only
one place; (ii) the arbitral proceedings are anchored to that place; (iii)
there are no significant contrary indicia to suggest that the place
232024 SCC OnLine SC 3212
designated is merely a venue and not the seat; and (iv) the stipulation
of a supranational body of rules (such as the ICC Rules) does not
constitute a contrary indicium, but rather serves as a positive indicator
that the place designated is the juridical seat of arbitration.
73. Lastly, it was submitted that the Section 9 petition was validly
instituted before this Court, because the Bank Guarantee was issued
by Yes Bank, Chanakyapuri Branch, New Delhi, and the Appellant’s
registered office is situated in Delhi. It was further pointed out that the
Bank Guarantee is governed by Indian law, and Clause 14 thereof
confers exclusive jurisdiction on the courts at Delhi, coupled with the
invocation of the Bank Guarantee was to take place in Delhi.
74. He contended that at the pre-arbitration stage, jurisdiction under
Section 9 of the Act may be invoked based on the location of the
subject matter or asset. In support of this submission, reliance was
placed on Article 28 of the ICC Rules, which expressly permits parties
to seek interim relief from a competent judicial authority, clarifying
that such recourse neither amounts to a breach or waiver of the
arbitration agreement nor restricts the powers of the Arbitral Tribunal.
ANALYSIS
75. We have heard the learned counsel for both parties at
considerable length, perused the material placed on record, and
carefully examined the relevant statutory provisions judicial
76. At the outset, it would be apposite to advert to the preamble to
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (“the Act”), which
underscores the legislative intent to provide a unified and
comprehensive legal framework for the fair, expeditious, and efficient
resolution of disputes arising out of international commercial
relations. Arbitration, particularly in the international commercial
context, is founded upon the principles of party autonomy, certainty,
and minimal judicial intervention, which collectively constitute the
bedrock of the arbitral process.
77. Before proceedings further, we deem it apposite to reiterate that
party autonomy forms the backbone of arbitration. The choices
consciously made by parties in their contractual arrangements,
particularly with respect to the seat of arbitration, governing law, and
procedural framework, are of paramount importance and assume
decisive significance while determining jurisdictional issues in
international commercial arbitration. It is with this foundational
principle in mind that we proceed to adjudicate the present
controversy.
78. The present appeal arises out of a dispute embedded in an
international commercial relationship. In order to address the
controversy in a structured and effective manner, it is necessary to
79. The Respondent No.1 is a company incorporated in Spain,
which entered into two distinct agreements with the Appellant herein
in furtherance of a commercial project. The first agreement, namely
the Supply Contract, contained a dispute resolution clause stipulating
that arbitration proceedings would be conducted in accordance with
the Rules of the International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), Paris.
The governing law of the agreement was expressly stated to be the
Indian law, while the “seat” of arbitration was designated as London.
80. The second agreement, namely the MSA, also adopted a
substantially similar arbitral framework. It provided that disputes
would be resolved by arbitration under the ICC Rules Paris, the
governing law of the agreement would be Indian law, and the “place”
of arbitration would be London. A significant distinction, however,
lies in the fact that the MSA expressly excluded the applicability of
Part I of the Act.
81. Upon disputes arising between the parties, the Respondents
initiated arbitral proceedings in London. The arbitral tribunal, by a
majority award, ruled in favour of the Respondents. Aggrieved
thereby, the Appellant sought to challenge the arbitral award by
invoking Section 34 of the Act before this Court. The learned Single
Judge dismissed the petition on the ground of lack of jurisdiction,
holding that since the seat of the arbitration was outside India, Part-I
82. The Appellant contends before us that the Supply Contract
expressly stipulates Indian law governing the arbitration agreement
and, therefore, Indian courts would have jurisdiction to entertain a
challenge under Section 34 of the Act. On the other hand, the
Respondents contend that it is a settled position of law that Part-I of
the Act has no application to foreign-seated arbitrations and that, in
the present case, its applicability stands excluded both expressly
(under the MSA) and by necessary implication.
83. In the aforesaid factual backdrop, and having regard to the
impugned order and the rival submissions advanced before us, the
core issue that arises for our consideration is whether the learned
Single Judge was correct in holding that Part I of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act of 1996 is not applicable to the arbitral
proceedings and awards in question.
84. It is not in dispute that the place of arbitration in both
agreements is outside India. Hence, before addressing the core issue, it
becomes imperative to examine the evolved legal position governing
the applicability of Part-I of the Act to international commercial
arbitrations placed outside India
85. In this context, reference must be made to the relevant statutory
provisions forming the basis of our analysis. Section 2(f) of the Act
defines “international commercial arbitration”. Section 2(1)(e) defines
the term "Court", while Section 2(2) delineates the extent of the
jurisdiction. These provisions collectively constitute the statutory
framework that governs the present controversy and as such it would
in the best of things that these provisions are re-capitulated as herein
below:
“(f) “international commercial arbitration” means an arbitration
relating to disputes arising out of legal relationships, whether
contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in
force in India and where at least 1 of the parties is – (i) an
individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any
country other than India; or (ii) a body corporate which is
incorporated in any country other than India; or
“(e) “Court” means – (i) in the case of an arbitration other than
an international commercial arbitration, the principal Civil Court
of original jurisdiction in the district, and includes the High Court
in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of
the arbitration is the same had been the subject-matter of the suit,
but does not include any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such
principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes;
(ii) in the case of international commercial arbitration, the High
Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of
the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit,
and in other cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear
appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to that High Court;”
“(2) This Part shall apply where the place of arbitration is in
India:
Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary, the
provisions of sections 9, 27 and clause (a) of sub-section (1) and
sub-section (3) of section 37 shall also apply to international
commercial arbitration, even if the place of arbitration is outside
India, and an arbitral award made or to be made in such place is
enforceable and recognised under the provisions of Part II of this
Act.”
Section 42. Jurisdiction Notwithstanding anything contained
elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for the time being in
force, where with respect to an arbitration agreement any
application under this Part has been made in a Court, that Court
sequent applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral
proceedings shall be made in that Court and in no other Court."
86. Thus, having considered the relevant statutory provisions, we
now advert to the judicial pronouncements which have authoritatively
settled the law on this issue. The question of applicability of Part I of
the Act to arbitrations seated or placed outside India is no longer res
integra. The legal position has been crystallized through a consistent
line of decisions, especially in light of Arif Azim Co. Ltd. (Supra).
87. However, for the sake of ease of analytical clarity and
completeness, it would be apposite to trace the doctrinal evolution of
this principle through the seminal judgments of the Apex Court, which
have progressively shaped the legal tapestry governing the interplay
between seat of arbitration, governing law, and the applicability of
Part I of the Act.
THE BHATIA REGIME
88. The Supreme Court in Bhatia International v. Bulk Trading
S.A.(supra) expanded the doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction by
holding that Part I of the Act applied even to arbitrations held outside
India, unless the arbitration agreement expressly or impliedly
excluded its applicability. The Court reasoned that Section 2(2)
merely stated that Part I “shall apply where the place of arbitration is
in India” and did not employ the restrictive word “only”. On this
arbitration, including foreign-seated arbitrations The relevant extract
of BHATIA (supra) is reproduced below:
“16. A reading of the provisions shows that the said Act applies to
arbitrations which are held in India between Indian nationals
and to international commercial arbitrations whether held in
India or out of India. Section 2(1)(f) defines an international
commercial arbitration. The definition makes no distinction
between international commercial arbitrations held in India or
outside India. An international commercial arbitration may be
held in a country which is a signatory to either the New York
Convention or the Geneva Convention (hereinafter called “the
convention country”). An international commercial arbitration
may be held in a non-convention country. The said Act nowhere
provides that its provisions are not to apply to international
commercial arbitrations which take place in a nonconvention
country. Admittedly, Part II only applies to arbitrations which take
place in a convention country. Mr Sen fairly admitted that Part II
would not apply to an international commercial arbitration which
takes place in a non-convention country. He also fairly admitted
that there would be countries which are not signatories either to
the New York Convention or to the Geneva Convention. It is not
possible to accept the submission that the said Act makes no
provision for international commercial arbitrations which take
place in a nonconvention country
***
20. Section 2(1)(e) defines “court” [...] A court is one which would
otherwise have jurisdiction in respect of the subject-matter.The
definition does not provide that the courts in India will not have
jurisdiction if an international commercial arbitration takes
place outside India. Courts in India would have jurisdiction even
in respect of an international commercial arbitration. As stated
above, an ouster of jurisdiction cannot be implied. An ouster of
jurisdiction has to be express.”
(emphasis supplied)
89. After BHATIA (supra), this position was subsequently
reaffirmed in Venture Global Engineering v. Satyam Computer
Services Ltd.25 and Indtel Technical Services (P) Ltd. v. W.S. Atkins
Rail Ltd26, thereby entrenching the doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction
under India arbitration law.
THE BALCO REGIME: SEAT-CENTRIC APPROACH
90. However, the correctness of the decision in BHATIA (supra)
came under serious judicial scrutiny due to its departure from the
territorial principle embodied in the UNCITRAL Model Law, which
India intended to adopt. This divergence culminated in the landmark
Constitutional Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in BALCO
(supra), which expressly overruled BHATIA (supra).
91. In BALCO (supra), the Supreme Court held that Part-I of the Act
applies exclusively to arbitrations seated in India. Section 2(2) was
interpreted as embodying a territorial limitation, consistent with the
UNCITRAL Model Law. The Court unequivocally rejected the doctrine
of concurrent jurisdiction and held that the seat of arbitration is the
determinative factor for conferring supervisory jurisdiction upon courts.
92. The Court emphasized that the seat of arbitration constitutes the
juridical home or “centre of gravity” of the arbitral proceedings, and it is
the law of the seat (lex arbitri) that governs and determines the courts
competent to exercise supervisory jurisdiction. Importantly, the Court
clarified that the seat is distinct from the venue, as arbitral hearings may
be conducted at locations other than the seat for convenience, without
altering the juridical seat of arbitration.
93. However, recognizing the disruptive impact of a retrospective
overruling, the Court held that BALCO (supra) would apply
prospectively, i.e., only to arbitration Agreement executed on or after 6
September 2012. Consequently, arbitration agreements executed prior to
this date, in principle, came to be governed by the BHATIA (supra)
regime. The relevant extract capturing the above-mentioned observation
reads as under:
“75. We are also unable to accept the submission of the learned
counsel for the appellants that the Arbitration Act, 1996 does not
make seat of the g arbitration as the centre of gravity of the
arbitration. On the contrary, it is accepted by most of the experts
that in most of the national laws, arbitrations are anchored to the
seat/place/situs of arbitration. Redfern in Para 3.54 concludes
that "the seat of the arbitration is thus intended to be its centre of
gravity." This, however, does not mean that all the proceedings of
the arbitration have to take place at the seat of the arbitration. The
arbitrators at times hold meetings at more convenient locations
......
***
77.We are of the opinion that the omission of the word “only” in
Section 2(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1996 does not detract from the
territorial scope of its application as embodied in Article 1(2) of
the Model Law. The article merely states that the Arbitration Law
as enacted in a given state shall apply if the arbitration is in the
territory of that State. The absence of the word “only” which is
found in Article 1(2) of the Model Law, from Section 2(2) of the
Arbitration Act, 1996 does not change the content/import of
Section 2(2) as limiting the application of Part I of the Arbitration
Act, 1996 to arbitrations where the place/seat is in India. 76.
78.For the reasons stated above, we are unable to support the
conclusion reached in Bhatia International and Venture Global
Engineering (supra), that Part I would also apply to arbitrations
that do not take place in India.
116. The legal position that emerges from a conspectus of all the
decisions, seems to be, that the choice of another country as the
seat of arbitration inevitably imports an acceptance that the law
of that country relating to the conduct and supervision of
arbitrations will apply to the proceedings.
117. It would, therefore, follow that if the arbitration agreement is
found or held to provide for a seat/place of arbitration outside
India, then the provision that the Arbitration Act, 1996 would
govern the arbitration proceedings, would not make Part I of the
Arbitration Act, 1996 applicable or enable the Indian courts to
exercise supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration or the
award. It would only mean that the parties have contractually
imported from the Arbitration Act, 1996, those provisions which
are concerned with the internal conduct of their arbitration and
which are not inconsistent with the mandatory provisions of the
English procedural law/curial law. This necessarily follows from
the fact that Part I applies only to arbitrations having their
seat/place in India.”
197. The judgment in Bhatia International was rendered by this
Court on 13-3-2002. Since then, the aforesaid judgment has been
followed by all the High Courts as well as by this Court on
numerous occasions. In fact, the judgment in Venture Global
Engg. has been rendered on 10-1-2008 in terms of the ratio of the
decision in Bhatia lnternational2. Thus, in order to do complete
justice, we hereby order, that the law now declared by this Court
shall apply prospectively, to all the arbitration agreements
executed hereafter.
THE ENERCON ENDORSEMENT
94. However, subsequent decisions of the Supreme Court
substantially narrowed the practical distinction between pre-BALCO
and post-BALCO agreements.
95. In Enercon (India) Ltd. & Ors. v. Enercon GMBH & Anr.27,
the Court reaffirmed that the seat of arbitration alone determines
exclusive supervisory jurisdiction, and merely referring to a place as
the "venue" would not automatically elevate it to the status of a "seat"
unless supported by additional indicia. The Court clarified that
phrases such as "venue of arbitration shall be in London" are not by
themselves, conclusive, whereas expressions like "arbitration in
London" may, depending on the context, denote both seat and venue.
The relevant para capturing the above understood observation reads as
follow –
“97 ...This now clears the decks for the crucial question,
i.e., is the ‘seat’ of arbitration in London or in India. This
is necessarily so as the location of the seat will determine
the Courts that will have exclusive jurisdiction to oversee
the arbitration proceedings. Therefore, understandably,
much debate has been generated before us on the question
whether the use of the phrase “venue shall be in London”
actually refers to designation of the seat of arbitration in
London.
***
123. The cases relied upon by Dr Singhvi relate to the
phrase "arbitration in London" or expressions similar
thereto. The same cannot be equated with the term "venue
of arbitration proceedings shall be in London".
Arbitration in London can be understood to include venue
as well as seat; but it would be rather stretching the
imagination if "venue of arbitration shall be in London"
could be understood as "seat of arbitration shall be
London", in the absence of any other factor connecting
the arbitration to London. In spite of Dr Singhvi's
seemingly attractive submission to convince us, we decline
to entertain the notion that India would not be the natural
forum for all remedies in relation to the disputes, having
such a close and intlmate connection with India. In
contrast, London is described only as a venue which Dr
Singhvi says would be the natural forum.
RELIANCE II
96. This jurisprudence was further refined in Reliance Industries
Ltd. v. Union of India (RELIANCE II) (supra). The Apex Court
clarified that even under the BHATIA regime, Part I of the Act stood
excluded wherever such exclusion was express or could be inferred by
necessary implication. The Apex Court held that a foreign seat or a
foreign governing law of the arbitration agreement constitutes such
necessary implication, thereby excluding Part I of the Act, regardless
of whether the agreement was executed pre or post-BALCO. Thus,
RELIANCE II significantly diluted the formal prospective limitation
imposed in BALCO and effectively curtailed the applicability of
concurrent jurisdiction even for pre-BALCO agreements. The relevant
extract is reproduced as follows:
“21. The last paragraph of BALCO judgment has now to be
read with two caveats, both emanating from para 32 of
Bhatia International itself — that where the Court comes to
a determination that the juridical seat is outside India or
where law other than Indian law governs the arbitration
agreement, Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996 would be
excluded by necessary implication. Therefore, even in the
cases governed by the Bhatia principle, it is only those cases
in which agreements stipulate that the seat of the arbitration
is in India or on whose facts a judgment cannot be reached
on the seat of the arbitration as being outside India that
would continue to be governed by the Bhatia principle. Also,
it is only those agreements which stipulate or can be read to
stipulate that the law governing the arbitration agreement is
Indian law which would continue to be governed by the
Bhatia rule.”
THE NORTHERN STAR: ARIF AZIM
97. The law was comprehensively consolidated and the
applicability of Part-I of the Act to arbitration seated outside India,
now stands conclusively settled by the Supreme Court in Arif Azim
(supra). The Court undertook a detailed review tracing the
jurisdictional evolution beginning from National Thermal Power
Corporation (supra) through BHATIA, BALCO, RELIANCE II and
subsequent authorities, culminating in a definitive restatement of
principles thus clarifying the legal position with precision, as follows:
“39. Thus, the legal position that emerges from a conspectus of all
the decisions referred to above is that Part I of the Act and the
provisions thereunder only applies where the arbitration takes
place in India i.e., where either (I) the seat of arbitration is in
India OR (II) the law governing the arbitration agreement is
Indian law. As a natural corollary to the above, the position of law
may be summarized as under: -
(i) Arbitration agreements executed after 06.09.2012 where the
seat of arbitration is outside India, Part I of the Act, 1996 and the
provisions thereunder will not be applicable and would fall beyond
the jurisdiction of Indian courts by virtue of the decision of this
Court in BALCO (supra).
(ii) Even those arbitration agreements that have been executed
prior to 06.09.2012 and thus, governed by Bhatia International
(supra), Part I of the Act, 1996 may not necessarily be applicable,
if its application has been excluded by the parties in the arbitration
agreement either explicitly by designating the seat of arbitration
outside India or implicitly by choosing the law governing the
agreement to be any other law other than Indian law, by virtue of
Reliance Industries (supra).
(iii) Thus, irrespective of the date of execution of arbitration
agreement, Part I of the Act, 1996 will be applicable only to those
arbitration agreements where the seat or place of arbitration is in
India OR in the absence of any categorical finding as to the place
or seat of arbitration, where such agreement stipulates or can be
read to stipulate that the law governing the arbitration agreement
98. A comprehensive reading of Arif Azim (supra) makes it
abundantly clear and demonstrates that the earlier perceived
dichotomy between pre-BALCO and post-BALCO agreements has
now been substantially neutralized. The Apex Court authoritatively
held that irrespective of the date of execution of the arbitration
agreement, the applicability of Part I is now strictly confined to the
two situations, i.e (i) where the juridical seat of arbitration is in India;
or (ii) where no categorical determination of the seat or place of
arbitration is possible even after applying settled legal tests, and the
law governing the arbitration agreement is Indian law.
99. Therefore, in light of the law established in RELIANCE II
(supra) and as clarified in Arif Azim (supra), the applicability of Part I
is contingent upon the satisfaction of specific jurisdictional condition
and in absence of these conditions, Indian courts lack supervisory
jurisdiction, and Part I stands excluded in respect of foreign seated
arbitrations. Thus, this pronouncement decisively eliminates all
residual ambiguity and uncertainty surrounding the continued
relevance of BHATIA to pre-BALCO agreements and conclusively
restricts the application of Part I in harmony with Section 2(2) of the
Act to foreign seated arbitrations, whether pre or post-BALCO.
POSITION OF LAW- APPLICABILITY OF PART-I
100. A combined reading of the Post- BALCO authorities make it
abundantly clear that supervisory jurisdiction is inseparably linked to
between “seat and “venue”, the designation of a juridical seat
automatically attracts the curial law of that seat and vests exclusive
supervisory jurisdiction in the courts of that seat. This seat-centric
approach is now firmly entrenched in Indian Arbitration Law and
brings it in consonance with the UNCITRAL Model Law, which is
founded on the territorial principle.
101. The Supreme Court in para 39 (iii) in Arif Azim case (supra)
reaffirmed that Part I of the Act would apply only if the seat or place
of arbitration is in India. It is further clarified that recourse to the law
governing the arbitration agreement arises only as a last resort and
only in cases where no categorical determination of the seat or place is
possible even after applying settled legal principles and exhausting all
legally recognized mechanisms. The law governing the arbitration
agreement becomes relevant merely as a residual consideration. Given
that supervisory jurisdiction is inseparably linked to the seat, the
determination of the seat becomes a threshold inquiry. The “juridical
seat”, being the legal home of arbitration, determines which court
alone may exercise supervisory control and only after the seat is
identified, the applicability of Part I and the jurisdiction of Indian
courts can be conclusively resolved and concluded.
DETERMINATION OF SEAT
102. As the law regarding the applicability of Part-I is understood,
we shall now apply the same in reverting to the main issue regarding
concur supervisory jurisdiction on the territorial courts.
103. The decision in Arif Azim (supra) plays a significant role in
streamlining the law of arbitration in India. While respecting
established precedents, it decisively clarifies lingering doctrinal
uncertainties. Building upon the principles established in BGS SGS
Soma JV (supra), this decision carved out a distinction between ‘seat’
and ‘venue’ particularly where arbitration clauses specify a “place” of
arbitration without expressly using the term “seat”, thereby granting
supervisory jurisdiction to the courts of that place. While determining
the aforesaid proposition, the Court examined and harmonized the
principles relating to the now discarded doctrine of concurrent
jurisdiction, the Shashoua principle and the close connection test
propounded in NTPC (supra).
104. Thus, pertaining to the test regarding determination of the seat
of arbitration, the Apex Court re-affirmed the Shashoua principle and
categorically held that the doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction is no
longer sustainable in Indian law The Supreme Court in Arif Azim
(supra) interpreting Roger Shashoua (supra), clarified that, where a
venue is expressly designated, coupled with the adoption of curial or
supranational rules associated with that place and supported by
additional indicia pointing to exclusivity, the named venue must be
construed as the juridical seat of arbitration. The Court further
clarified that BALCO (supra) expressly affirmed the Shashoua
principle, this affirmation was recognized in Enercon (supra) and any
unequivocally rejected. Thus, Shashoua principle stands as settled law
in India. The relevant observation made regarding the same makes for
an interesting read and is being curled in as follows:
“51. In Roger Shashoua (2) v. Mukesh Sharmareported in (2017)
14 SCC 722 this Court held that the test that was applied in NTPC
(supra) was no longer a good law in view of the repeal of Section
9(b) of the Act, 1961. It further, held that the principle enunciated
in Roger Shashoua (1) had been expressly approved by the 5-Judge
Bench decision of this Court in BALCO (supra). Accordingly, this
Court applying the Shashoua Principle held that the mention of
London in the arbitration agreement was not merely as a location
but as a juridical seat. The relevant observations read as under: -
“46. As stated earlier, in Shashoua Cooke, J., in the course of
analysis, held that “London arbitration” is a well-known
phenomenon which is often chosen by foreign nationals with a
different law, such as the law of New York, governing the
substantive rights of the parties and it is because of the legislative
framework and supervisory powers of the courts here which many
parties are keen to adopt. The learned Judge has further held that
when there is an express designation of the arbitration venue as
London and no designation of any alternative place as the seat,
combined with a supranational body of rules governing the
arbitration and no other significant contrary indicia, the
inexorable conclusion is that London is the juridical seat and
English law the curial law.
***
54. We had earlier extracted extensively from the said judgment, as
we find, the Court after adverting to various aspects, has
categorically held that the High Court had not followed the
Shashoua principle. The various decisions referred to in Enercon
(India) Ltd., the analysis made and the propositions deduced leads
to an indubitable conclusion that Shashoua principle has been
accepted by Enercon (India) Ltd. It is also to be noted that in
Balco, the Constitution Bench has not merely reproduced few
paragraphs from Shashoua but has also referred to other decisions
on which Shashoua has placed reliance upon. As we notice, there
is analysis of earlier judgments, though it does not specifically
state that “propositions laid down in Shashoua are accepted”. On
a clear reading, the ratio of the decision in Balco, in the ultimate
eventuate, reflects that the Shashoua principle has been accepted
and the two-Judge Bench in Enercon (India) Ltd., after succinctly
by the Constitution Bench. Therefore, we are unable to accept the
submission of Mr Chidambaram that the finding recorded in
Enercon (India) Ltd. that Shashoua principle has been accepted in
Balco should be declared as per incuriam.
***
60. Tested on the aforesaid principle, we find that the question that
arose in Balco and the discussion that has been made by the larger
Bench relating to Shashoua and C v. D are squarely in the context
of applicability of Part I or Part II of the Act. It will not be
erroneous to say that the Constitution Bench has built the
propositional pyramid on the basis or foundation of certain
judgments and Shashoua and C v. D are two of them. It will be
inappropriate to say that in Enercon (India) Ltd. the Court has
cryptically observed that observations made in Shashoua have
been approvingly quoted by the Court in Balco in para 110. We are
inclined to think, as we are obliged to, that the Shashoua principle
has been accepted in Balco as well as Enercon (India) Ltd. on
proper ratiocination and, therefore, the submission advanced on
this score by Mr Chidambaram, learned Senior Counsel for the
respondent, is repelled.
***
72. It is worthy to note that the arbitration agreement is not silent
as to what law and procedure is to be followed. On the contrary,
Clause 14.1. lays down that the arbitration proceedings shall be in
accordance with the Rules of Conciliation and Arbitration of ICC.
In Enercon (India) Ltd., the two-Judge Bench referring to
Shashoua case accepted the view of Cooke, J. that the phrase
“venue of arbitration shall be in London, UK” was accompanied
by the provision in the arbitration clause or arbitration to be
conducted in accordance with the Rules of ICC in Paris. The two-
Judge Bench accepted the Rules of ICC, Paris which is
supranational body of Rules as has been noted by Cooke, J. and
that is how it has accepted that the parties have not simply
provided for the location of hearings to be in London. To
elaborate, the distinction between the venue and the seat remains.
But when a court finds that there is prescription for venue and
something else, it has to be adjudged on the facts of each case to
determine the juridical seat. As in the instant case, the agreement
in question has been interpreted and it has been held that London
is not mentioned as the mere location but the courts in London will
have the jurisdiction, another interpretative perception as
***
74. It is apposite to note that the said decision has been discussed
at length in Union of India v. Reliance Industries Ltd. The Court,
in fact, reproduced the arbitration clause in Singer Co. and
referred to the analysis made in the judgment and noted that
notwithstanding the award, it was a foreign award, since the
substantive law of the contract was Indian law and the arbitration
law was part of the contract, the arbitration clause would be
governed by Indian law and not by the Rules of International
Chamber of Commerce. On that basis the Court held in Singer Co.
that the mere fact that the venue chosen by the ICC Court or
conduct of the arbitration proceeding was London, does not
exclude the operation of the Act which dealt with the domestic
awards under the 1940 Act. and thereafter opined:
“13. It can be seen that this Court in Singer case did not
give effect to the difference between the substantive law of
the contract and the law that governed the arbitration.
Therefore, since a construction of Section 9(b) of the
Foreign Awards Act led to the aforesaid situation and led
to the doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction, the 1996 Act,
while enacting Section 9(a) of the repealed Foreign
Awards Act, 1961, in Section 51 thereof, was careful
enough to omit Section 9(b) of the 1961 Act which, as
stated hereinabove, excluded the Foreign Awards Act from
applying to any award made on arbitration agreements
governed by the law of India.
14. This being the case, the theory of concurrent
jurisdiction was expressly given a go-by with the dropping
of Section 9(b) of the Foreign Awards Act, while enacting
Part II of the Arbitration Act, 1996, which repealed all the
three earlier laws and put the law of arbitration into one
statute, albeit in four different parts.”
75. We respectfully concur with the said view, for there is no
reason to differ. Apart from that, we have already held that the
agreement in question having been interpreted in a particular
manner by the English courts and the said interpretation having
gained acceptation by this Court, the inescapable conclusion is
that the courts in India have no jurisdiction.”
(emphasis supplied)
down in BGS SOMA (supra), which governs the circumstances when
a “`venue” can be construed as a “seat”. The Apex Court observed
that where an arbitration clause stipulated only one place, which is
designated or mentioned in the arbitration agreement, and the arbitral
proceedings are fixed or anchored to that place, typically through
expressions such as “arbitration shall be held at .....”, indicating that
the place is not merely for occasional hearings or meetings and there
is no strong contrary indication suggesting that the designated place is
merely a convenient venue and not the juridical seat, such place must
be treated as the juridical seat of arbitration. Once the place is
construed as the seat, it confers exclusive supervisory jurisdiction on
the courts of that place. The observation capturing the three-condition
test reads as follows:
52. This Court in its decision in BGS SGS SOMA JV v. NHPC
LTD., reported in (2020) 4 SCC 234 held that wherever in the
arbitration agreement there is designation of a place of arbitration
as ‘venue’ of the ‘arbitral proceedings’, then such place effectively
is the ‘seat’ of arbitration. This is because, the expression ‘arbitral
proceedings’ does not refer to individual hearings but rather the
whole arbitration process including the making of the award. It
further held that where the parties have anchored the arbitral
proceedings to one fixed location or place, it would indicate that
the parties intended such place to be the seat of arbitration. It held
that where the place designated as venue in the arbitration
agreement is coupled with there being no other significant contrary
indicia that such place is merely a venue, then such place would be
construed as the ‘seat’ of the arbitral proceedings. This Court also
added that the international context where a supranational body of
rules is to govern the arbitration in or in the national context the
laws of a particular country then this would further be an indicia
that the ‘venue’ designated in the arbitration agreement is really
the seat of arbitration. The relevant observations read as under: -
“82. On a conspectus of the aforesaid judgments, it may
be concluded that whenever there is the designation of a
“venue” of the arbitration proceedings, the expression
“arbitration proceedings” would make it clear that the
“venue” is really the “seat” of the arbitral proceedings,
as the aforesaid expression does not include just one or
more individual or particular hearing, but the arbitration
proceedings as a whole, including the making of an award
at that place. This language has to be contrasted with
language such as “tribunals are to meet or have
witnesses, experts or the parties” where only hearings are
to take place in the “venue”, which may lead to the
conclusion, other things being equal, that the venue so
stated is not the “seat” of arbitral proceedings, but only a
convenient place of meeting. Further, the fact that the
arbitral proceedings “shall be held” at a particular venue
would also indicate that the parties intended to anchor
arbitral proceedings to a particular place, signifying
thereby, that that place is the seat of the arbitral
proceedings. This, coupled with there being no other
significant contrary indicia that the stated venue is merely
a “venue” and not the “seat” of the arbitral proceedings,
would then conclusively show that such a clause
designates a “seat” of the arbitral proceedings. In an
international context, if a supranational body of rules is to
govern the arbitration, this would further be an indicia
that “the venue”, so stated, would be the seat of the
arbitral proceedings. In a national context, this would be
replaced by the Arbitration Act, 1996 as applying to the
“stated venue”, which then becomes the “seat” for the
purposes of arbitration.”
(Emphasis supplied)
53. Thus, this Court in BGS SGS SOMA (supra) laid down a
three-condition test as to when ‘venue’ can be construed as
‘seat’ of arbitration. The conditions that are required to be
fulfilled are as under:
i. The arbitration agreement or clause in question should
designate or mention only one place;
ii. Such place must have anchored the arbitral proceedings
i.e., the arbitral proceedings must have been fixed to that place
alone without any scope of change;
iii. There must be no other significant contrary indicia to show
that the place designated is merely the venue and not the seat.
has been designated as ‘venue’ can be construed as the ‘seat’ of
arbitration. It is clarified that, while applying the aforesaid test,
it must be borne in mind that where a supranational body of
rules has been stipulated in an arbitration agreement or clause,
such stipulation is not to be regarded as a contrary indicium,
such stipulation does not mean that no seat has been designated
rather such stipulation is a positive indicia that the place so
designated is actually the ‘seat’.
106. The Court further clarified that where there is a reference of
institutional rules, procedural rules or curial law of a particular
jurisdiction, it constitutes a positive indicia supporting the conclusion
that the designated place is the juridical seat of the arbitration, and not
merely a venue for conducting hearings.
107. The Apex Court, at the culmination of its judgment in
paragraph 71 of Arif Azim (supra), summarised the overall law
governing to the applicability of Part-I of the Act, determination of the
arbitral seat, and supervisory jurisdiction of courts. This authoritative
summary conclusively dispels any residual ambiguity regarding the
role of Indian courts in arbitrations seated outside India, and now
serves as the guiding & controlling legal framework for adjudicating
jurisdictional issues. The principles enunciated therein provide a clear,
predictable, and internationally aligned approach, ensuring minimal
judicial intervention and reinforcing India's pro’arbitration stance.
We, therefore, deem it necessary to reproduce the summarised
position of law mentioned in paragraph 71 of Arif Azim (supra), the
same reads as follows:
“71. From the above exposition of law, the following
position of law emerges: -
(i) Part I of the Act, 1996 and the provisions thereunder only
(I) the seat of arbitration is in India OR (II) the law governing the
arbitration agreement are the laws of India.
(ii) Arbitration agreements executed after 06.09.2012 where the
seat of arbitration is outside India, Part I of the Act, 1996 and the
provisions thereunder will not be applicable and would fall beyond
the jurisdiction of Indian courts.
(iii) Even those arbitration agreements that have been executed
prior to 06.09.2012 Part I of the Act, 1996 will not be applicable, if
its application has been excluded by the parties in the arbitration
agreement either explicitly by designating the seat of arbitration
outside India or implicitly by choosing the law governing the
agreement to be any other law other than Indian law.
(iv) The moment ‘seat’ is determined, it would be akin to an
exclusive jurisdiction clause whereby only the jurisdictional courts
of that seat alone will have the jurisdiction to regulate the arbitral
proceedings. The notional doctrine of concurrent jurisdiction has
been expressly rejected and overruled by this Court in its
subsequent decisions.
(v) The ‘Closest Connection Test’ for determining the seat of
arbitration by identifying the law with which the agreement to
arbitrate has its closest and most real connection is no longer a
viable criterion for determination of the seat or situs of arbitration
in view of the Shashoua Principle. The seat of arbitration cannot
be determined by formulaic and unpredictable application of
choice of law rules based on abstract connecting factors to the
underlying contract. Even if the law governing the contract has
been expressly stipulated, it does not mean that the law governing
the arbitration agreement and by extension the seat of arbitration
will be the same as the lex contractus.
(vi) The more appropriate criterion for determining the seat of
arbitration in view of the subsequent decisions of this Court is that
where in an arbitration agreement there is an express designation
of a place of arbitration anchoring the arbitral proceedings to such
place, and there being no other significant contrary indicia to show
otherwise, such place would be the ‘seat’ of arbitration even if it is
designated in the nomenclature of ‘venue’ in the arbitration
agreement.
(vii) Where the curial law of a particular place or supranational
body of rules has been stipulated in an arbitration agreement or
clause, such stipulation is a positive indicium that the place so
governing the arbitration agreement and by extension the seat of
the arbitration tends to coincide with the curial law.
(viii) Merely because the parties have stipulated a venue without
any express choice of a seat, the courts cannot side line the specific
choices made by the parties in the arbitration agreement by
imputing these stipulations as inadvertence at the behest of the
parties as regards the seat of arbitration. Deference has to be
shown to each and every choice and stipulations made by the
parties, after all the courts are only a conduit or means to
arbitration, and the sum and substance of the arbitration is derived
from the choices of the parties and their intentions contained in the
arbitration agreement. It is the duty of the court to give weight and
due consideration to each choice made by the parties and to
construe the arbitration agreement in a manner that aligns the
most with such stipulations and intentions.
(ix) We do not for a moment say that, the Closest Connection Test
has no application whatsoever, where there is no express or
implied designation of a place of arbitration in the agreement
either in the form of ‘venue’ or ‘curial law’, there the closest
connection test may be more suitable for determining the seat of
arbitration.
(x) Where two or more possible places that have been designated
in the arbitration agreement either expressly or impliedly, equally
appear to be the seat of arbitration, then in such cases the conflict
may be resolved through recourse to the Doctrine of Forum Non
Conveniens, and the seat be then determined based on which one of
the possible places may be the most appropriate forum keeping in
mind the nature of the agreement, the dispute at hand, the parties
themselves and their intentions. The place most suited for the
interests of all the parties and the ends of justice may be
determined as the ‘seat’ of arbitration.”
108. From the foregoing analysis of statutory provisions and binding
judicial precedents, it emerges with unmistakable clarity that the
supervisory jurisdiction over arbitral proceedings under the Act is
exclusively seat centric. The juridical seat of arbitration determines
the curial law and the court vested with supervisory authority. Part I
of the Act applies only where the seat is situated in India; for foreign
exceptions under the proviso to Section 2(2). Further, the doctrine of
concurrent jurisdiction stands conclusively rejected. Once the seat is
identified, courts at the seat alone exercise supervisory jurisdiction.
As held in BGS SOMA (supra), applying the Shashoua principle, the
designation of a place as the “venue” of arbitration ordinarily
constitutes the seat in the absence of contrary indicia. This position
has been reaffirmed in Arif Azim (supra), which clarifies that Indian
courts lack supervisory jurisdiction over foreign seated arbitrations,
irrespective of any contractual, commercial or territorial connections
with India, does not alter this legal position. This settled position of
law must guide the adjudication of the present case, leaving no scope
for deviation based on obsolete doctrines or misconceived assertions
of jurisdiction.
DISORTHO
109. Having understood the law regarding the applicability of Part-I
of the Act, and the principles governing determination of the juridical
seat of arbitration, it becomes necessary to understand the decision of
Apex Court in Disortho (supra).
110. The dispute in Disortho (supra) arose between a Colombian
entity and an Indian company. The governing clause of the agreement
expressly provided that the contract would be governed by Indian law
and that all matters arising out of the agreement would be subject to
the exclusive jurisdiction of courts at Gujarat, India. However, the
arbitration under the rules of the Chamber of Commerce of Bogotá
(Colombia), and that the arbitral proceedings would be conducted at
Bogotá.
111. The Apex Court, while adjudicating the controversy, clarified
that parties to an arbitration agreement may expressly or impliedly
choose different laws governing distinct aspects of the arbitral
process, namely, (i) the law governing the arbitration (lex arbitri), (ii)
the law governing the arbitration agreement, (iii) the law governing
the substantive contract, and (iv) the procedural rules applicable to the
conduct of arbitration. It was observed that the law governing the
arbitration determines which courts exercise supervisory jurisdiction
over the arbitral proceedings, while the law governing the arbitration
agreement governs its validity, scope, interpretation, and
enforceability. Significantly, the Apex Court emphasized that the law
governing the arbitration agreement and the law governing the
arbitration are closely intertwined and, in many cases, subsumed
within each other. The Court cautioned against mechanically
differentiating between these concepts unless the contract clearly
warrants such a distinction. The relevant paragraph capturing the
above observation reads as follows:
“ 7. This ratio distinguishes between four choices of law –
(i) the law governing the arbitration, (ii) the proper law of
arbitration agreement, (iii) the proper law of contract, and
(iv) the procedural rules which apply in the arbitration.
These choices are either expressly provided or implied by
the parties involved. The passage also highlights the subtle
distinction between the proper law of arbitration agreement
(i.e., law governing the agreement to arbitrate) and the law
governing the arbitration as a whole. The law governing the
agreement to arbitrate determines the validity, scope, and
governing the arbitration itself is concerned with
determining which court has supervisory jurisdiction over
the arbitration. This jurisdictional framework pertains to the
conduct of the arbitration, the rules governing interim
measures, and the provisions under which the court may
exercise its supervisory authority, such as in the removal of
arbitrators.
8. While parties may elect to differentiate between the lex
arbitri — the law governing the agreement to arbitrate and
the law governing the arbitration itself — such a
distinction warrants caution. A distinction should not be
readily drawn unless the parties intended to preserve such
a distinction. Invariably, these concepts are subsumed in
each other. They are inherently intertwined as a part and
parcel of the lex arbitri. This is particularly apparent in
matters such as the filling of vacancies within the arbitral
tribunal or the removal of an arbitrator for misconduct. In
these situations, the law governing the arbitration
agreement and the law governing the arbitration overlap,
as both are essential to the functioning and integrity of the
arbitral process. Consequently, unless the parties have
provided otherwise, it is prudent not to divide lex arbitri.”
(emphasis supplied)
112. The Apex Court relying upon the judgment of the UK Supreme
Court in Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v. OOO Insurance Company
Chubb28,reiterated that the law governing the arbitration agreement
may, in appropriate case, be different from the law governing the main
contract. It was held that the determination of the law chosen by
contracting parties to govern the arbitration agreement must be carried
out by interpreting the arbitration clause, and if necessary, the
contract as a whole, in accordance with established principles of
contractual interpretation. It was further held that where the arbitration
clause is embedded in the main contract and there is no separate or
distinct choice of law governing the arbitration agreement, the
presumption is that the law governing the substantive contract (lex
contractus) also governs the arbitration agreement. The mere selection
of a foreign seat or venue, in the absence of a clear contrary intention,
does not displace this presumption. Where neither the arbitration
agreement nor the substantive contract specifies a governing law, the
law having the closest and most real connection with the arbitration
agreement would apply. The observations drawn read as follows:
13. In Enka Insaat Ve Sanayi AS v. OOO Insurance Company
Chubb,13 the UK Supreme Court examined this legal issue and
divergent opinions surrounding it. One line of precedents suggest
that the lex contractus should govern the arbitration agreement.
Although the arbitration agreement is separable from the main
contract, it is not completely detached from it. Conversely, there
is case law indicating that the law of the seat of arbitration
should typically govern the arbitration agreement. Enka Insaat
(supra) follows the principles stipulated in Sulamérica Cia
Nacional De Seguros S.A. and Others v. EnesaEngenharia S.A.
and Others,14 which it observes straddles both views. The Court
ultimately establishes the following principles:
“X Conclusions on applicable law
170. It may be useful to summarise the principles which in our
judgment govern the determination of the law applicable to the
arbitration agreement in cases of this kind:
i) Where a contract contains an agreement to resolve disputes
arising from it by arbitration, the law applicable to the arbitration
agreement may not be the same as the law applicable to the other
parts of the contract and is to be determined by applying English
common law rules for resolving conflicts of laws rather than the
provisions of the Rome I Regulation.
ii) According to these rules, the law applicable to the arbitration
agreement will be (a) the law chosen by the parties to govern it or
(b) in the absence of such a choice, the system of law with which
the arbitration agreement is most closely connected.
iii) Whether the parties have agreed on a choice of law to govern
the arbitration agreement is ascertained by construing the
applying the rules of contractual interpretation of English law as
the law of the forum.
iv) Where the law applicable to the arbitration agreement is not
specified, a choice of governing law for the contract will
generally apply to an arbitration agreement which forms part of
the contract.
v) The choice of a different country as the seat of the arbitration
is not, without more, sufficient to negate an inference that a
choice of law to govern the contract was intended to apply to the
arbitration agreement.
vi) Additional factors which may, however, negate such an
inference and may in some cases imply that the arbitration
agreement was intended to be governed by the law of the seat are:
(a) any provision of the law of the seat which indicates that,
where an arbitration is subject to that law, the arbitration
agreement will also be treated as governed by that country’s law;
or (b) the existence of a serious risk that, if governed by the same
law as the main contract, the 14 [2012] EWCA Civ 638. Arb.Pet.
No.48/2023 Page 10 of 26 arbitration agreement would be
ineffective. Either factor may be reinforced by circumstances
indicating that the seat was deliberately chosen as a neutral
forum for the arbitration.
vii) Where there is no express choice of law to govern the
contract, a clause providing for arbitration in a particular place
will not by itself justify an inference that the contract (or the
arbitration agreement) is intended to be governed by the law of
that place.
viii) In the absence of any choice of law to govern the arbitration
agreement, the arbitration agreement is governed by the law with
which it is most closely connected. Where the parties have chosen
a seat of arbitration, this will generally be the law of the seat,
even if this differs from the law applicable to the parties’
substantive contractual obligations.
ix) The fact that the contract requires the parties to attempt to
resolve a dispute through good faith negotiation, mediation or
any other procedure before referring it to arbitration will not
generally provide a reason to displace the law of the seat of
arbitration as the law applicable to the arbitration agreement by
default in the absence of a choice of law to govern it. (emphasis
14. The conclusions in Enka Insaat (supra) summarizes the tie
breaker rules. Sub-paragraph (i) explains that the law governing
the arbitration agreement may differ from the law governing the
contract. The former should be determined through conflict of
law rules. Sub-paragraph (ii) states that the law governing the
arbitration agreement is the law chosen by the parties. If no such
choice is made, the law most closely connected to the agreement
applies. However, sub-paragraph (ii) must be read alongside sub-
paragraph (iii), which clarifies that the law chosen for the
arbitration agreement is determined by interpreting the
agreement, and if necessary, the entire contract using rules of
contractual interpretation. Sub-paragraph (iv) states that when
the law governing the arbitration agreement is not specified, the
law of the contract (lex contractus) usually applies. Sub-
paragraph (v) highlights that selecting a country for the seat of
arbitration does not automatically alter the presumption that lex
contractus governs the arbitration agreement. Sub-paragraph (vi)
outlines factors that may override this presumption. This can
happen when the law of the seat mandates that the arbitration
agreement must be governed by the law of that country. For
instance, this becomes relevant in the context of the A&C Act.
Section 2(2) of the A&C Act stipulates that Part I of the A&C Act
applies to arbitrations seated in India. The second exception is
when there is a serious risk that the agreement will become
ineffective, or the dispute will become inarbitrable, if governed by
the same law as that of the contract. Third factor is where the
seat is deliberately chosen as a neutral forum. These factors will
displace the presumption in favour of lex contractus governing
the arbitration agreement. The factors mentioned in sub-para (vi)
are not exhaustive and there may be other additional factors
negating the presumption. Sub-para (vii) deals with cases where
a particular place is chosen as the venue in contrast to the seat of
arbitration. A place being chosen, does not by itself justify an
inference that the arbitration agreement is intended to be
governed by the law of this venue. Sub-para (viii) states that in
the absence of any choice of law governing the arbitration
agreement, the arbitration agreement will be governed by the law
with which it is most closely connected. The close connection test
applies only when the law governing the arbitration agreement
cannot be ascertained even after applying the earlier paragraphs.
In such a case, the law applicable to the seat of arbitration will be
the law having the closest connection to the arbitration even if it
differs from the parties’ contractual obligations. The closest
connection test and a presumption in favour of seat in terms of
sub-para (viii) will only apply when the contract does not
stipulate the lex contractus. Sub-para (ix) states cases relating to
mediation, etc. will not generally provide reason to displace the
law of the seat of arbitration
15. We believe the above conclusions state the good and correct
legal position, except on the aspects where the Courts in India
have taken a different view. Consistency and uniformity in
applying legal principles are crucial for ensuring fairness and
comity in international commerce and dispute resolution
mechanisms.
113. Further, relying on Sulamérica Cia Nacional De Seguros S.A.
and Others v. Enesa Engenharia S.A. and Others29 the Supreme
Court affirmed the three-stage enquiry to determine the proper law of
the arbitration agreement. The Supreme Court endorsed the principle
that it is reasonable to presume that the parties intend their entire
contractual relationship to be governed by a single system of law
throughout the contract. Accordingly, the test being (i) whether there
is an express choice of law governing the arbitration agreement, (ii) in
the absence of an express choice, whether an implied choice can be
discerned, and (iii) failing both, which law has the closest and most
real connection with the arbitration agreement. It was clarified that the
second stage arises only if the first stage yields a negative result, and
as a logical corollary, the third stage is triggered only if both the first
and second stages fail. The relevant extract is reproduced below:
16. Earlier, SulaméricaCia (supra) had laid down this three-fold
test to determine the law governing the arbitration agreement:
“25. Although there is a wealth of dicta touching on the problem, it
is accepted that there is no decision binding on this court.
However, the authorities establish two propositions that were not
controversial but which provide the starting point for any enquiry
into the proper law of an arbitration agreement. The first is that,
even if the agreement forms part of a substantive contract (as is
commonly the case), its proper law may not be the same as that of
the substantive contract. The second is that the proper law is to be
determined by undertaking a three-stage enquiry into (i) express
choice, (ii) implied choice and (iii) closest and most real
connection. As a matter of principle, those three stages ought to be
embarked on separately and in that order, since any choice made
by the parties ought to be respected, but it has been said on many
occasions that in practice stage (ii) often merges into stage (iii),
because identification of the system of law with which the
agreement has its closest and most real connection is likely to be
an important factor in deciding whether the parties have made an
implied choice of proper law: see Dicey, Morris & Collins, op. cit.
paragraph 32-006. Much attention has been paid in recent cases to
the closest and most real connection, but, for the reasons given
earlier, it is important not to overlook the question of implied
choice of proper law, particularly when the parties have expressly
chosen a system of law to govern the substantive contract of which
the arbitration agreement forms part. (emphasis supplied)”
Sulamérica Cia (supra) observes that the law governing the
arbitration agreement may differ from the law of the contract.
However, it is reasonable to presume that the parties intended for
their entire relationship to be governed by the same system of law
throughout the contract. In this context, a distinction is made
between a stand-alone arbitration agreement and one that is
embedded within a contract. In the former, a choice of seat of
arbitration becomes highly significant, and the law of the seat
would likely govern the arbitration agreement. However, when the
arbitration agreement forms part of a contract, the express choice
of a lex contractus strongly indicates the parties' intention. It
would generally be inferred that the arbitration is governed by the
same law as the substantive contract. However, this presumption is
rebuttable as previously highlighted. Even when the arbitration
agreement is part of the contract, the court must conduct a three-
the express choice of law; second, considering any implied choice;
and third, determining the closest and most real connection.
Second step is applied when the first step is negative, and the third
step is applied when the first and second steps are negative.”
114. The dispute resolution clause in Disortho (supra) designated
Bogotáas the venue of arbitration, while another clause in the
agreement expressly stipulated that the overall contract would be
governed by Indian law and that courts in Gujarat, India shall possess
supervisory jurisdiction. The Court therein noted that the agreement
It was further held that the mere designation of a venue or place for
conducting arbitral proceedings, is not sufficient to displace the
presumption in favour of the lex contractus. Hence, the Supreme
Court observed that while Bogotá was the venue and the procedural
rules of the Arbitration and Conciliation Centre at the Bogotá
Chamber of Commerce governed the conduct of the arbitration, such
stipulations did not curtail or exclude the supervisory jurisdiction of
Indian courts. Consequently, Part I of the Act was held to be
applicable, and Indian courts were found to retain supervisory
jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings. The observation drawn reads
as follows:
“29. Clause 16.5 is clear and unambiguous. It explicitly states
that the entire agreement shall be governed by and construed
in accordance with the laws of India, and all matters arising
from the agreement shall fall under the jurisdiction of the
courts in Gujarat, India. Given this, it is reasonable to assume
that, when drafting this clause, the parties were fully aware of
Clause 18, which provides for arbitration and conciliation
under the Arbitration and Conciliation Centre of the
Chambers of Commerce in Bogota. In our view, Bogota has
been designated as the venue for conciliation and
arbitration, while the courts in Gujarat, India, retain
exclusive jurisdiction over disputes. This must, unless there
is a divergence in lex arbitri, include jurisdiction over
appointments and act as a conduit for the arbitration in
Bogota, Colombia.
30. The law governing the arbitration agreement, being Indian
law, means that its validity, scope, and interpretation will be
determined in accordance with Indian law. But which national
courts—those in India or Colombia—exercise supervisory
jurisdiction over the arbitration proceedings? Does the A&C
Act apply to these arbitration proceedings? Upon a consistent
reading of the Distributor Agreement, it is clear that only the
courts in Gujarat, India, are referenced. While it is
acknowledged that the venue for arbitration is Bogota,
Colombia, and that the procedural rules of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Centre at the Chambers of Commerce in
powers of Indian courts, as explicitly outlined in Clause
16.5. 31. While recording the above findings, we are also
guided by the principles outlined above for locating the law
governing the arbitration agreement. We begin by applying
the three-step test developed by SulaméricaCia (supra). First,
neither Clause 16.5 nor Clause 18 explicitly stipulates the
governing law of the arbitration agreement. Therefore, we
proceed to the next step of the test, which involves identifying
the parties' implied choice of law for the arbitration
agreement. At this stage, there is a strong presumption that
the lex contractus, i.e., Indian law, governs the arbitration
agreement. As explained earlier, this presumption may be
displaced if the arbitration agreement is rendered non-
arbitrable under Indian law. But that is not the case here.
Furthermore, the mere choice of ‘place’ is not sufficient, in
the absence of other relevant factors, to override the
presumption in favor of the lex contractus. In this case, it is
important to note that no seat of arbitration has been
explicitly chosen. In conclusion, at this second stage of the
inquiry, we find that the parties have impliedly agreed that
Indian law governs the arbitration agreement, and the
controversy can be resolved accordingly.”
Thus, the Supreme Court unequivocally accorded primacy to the lex
contractus over the mere designation of a venue and procedural rules
while determining the law governing the arbitration and the
consequent supervisory jurisdiction, particularly in the absence of an
express designation of seat. Applying Enka (supra), the Apex Court
held that although the contract provides for arbitration in Bogotá
under Bogotá Institutional rules, this did not, by itself, constitute an
express designation of Bogota as the seat. The “mere choice of venue”
was held insufficient to override the presumption in favour of lex
contractus, in light of no express indication of seat.
115. Therefore, in the light of the various aforesaid judicial
pronouncements and settled legal principles, the framework is now
settled that the juridical seat of arbitration determines the court which
exercises supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and the
applicability of Part I of the Act.
116. The controversy involved in the present case arises out of two
distinct contracts, namely- (i) the Supply Contract, and (ii) the MSA.
Both contract must therefore be independently analysed to ascertain
the governing law, the nature of the arbitration clauses contained
therein, and most importantly, the juridical seat of arbitration. Such an
analysis must be undertaken keeping in mind that, unless there is a
clear and unmistakable designation of a foreign seat, the presumption
in favour of the lex contractus and the supervisory jurisdiction of
Indian courts continues to apply. Only upon such an examination can
the juridical seat of arbitration in the present case be conclusively
determined.
SUPPLY CONTRACT
117. Clause 22.3 of the Supply Contract expressly designates
London as the seat of arbitration, while Clause 22.2 provides for
arbitration under ICC Rules, Paris and Clause 22.5 stipulates Indian
law as the governing law of the contract.
118. In light of settled law, the dispute resolution mechanism under
the Supply Contract admits no ambiguity. The seat of arbitration, the
governing law of the substantive contract, and the procedural
119. The express use of the term ‘seat’ Clause 22.3, which is akin to
jurisdiction, leaves no scope for interpreting London as a mere venue.
A holistic reading of the supply contract reveals no reference to any
alternative place or venue for arbitration proceedings. Also, there is
nothing to suggest that London was intended merely as a convenient
location for hearings. The clause 22.3 read as follows:
22.3 The seat of the arbitration shall be London and the
language of the arbitration shall be English.
120. The parties’ intention to designate London as the juridical seat
is explicit and unambiguous, and there exists no “contrary indicia’ to
suggest otherwise.
121. The Apex Court in BGS SGS SOMA(supra) held that once a
seat is designated, the courts of that seat alone exercise exclusive
supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration proceedings. This position
was consistent with BALCO (supra), which clarified that the
designation of a seat amounts to an exclusive jurisdiction clause,
thereby excluding the possibility of two courts having concurrent
jurisdiction.
122. The Court further observed that Section 42 of the Act merely
intended to prevent jurisdictional conflicts by confining all arbitral
proceedings to a single court, provided that such court otherwise has
jurisdiction. Accordingly, once London is designated as the seat,
are barred from exercising such jurisdiction. For the sake of ease of
analysis, the observation of the Apex Court in BGS SOMA (supra) is
reproduced:
“40. A reading of paragraphs 75, 76, 96, 110, 116, 123 and 194 of
BALCO (supra) would show that where parties have selected the
seat of arbitration in their agreement, such selection would then
amount to an exclusive jurisdiction clause, as the parties have
now indicated that the Courts at the “seat” would alone have
jurisdiction to entertain challenges against the arbitral award
which have been made at the seat. The example given in
paragraph 96 buttresses this proposition, and is supported by the
previous and subsequent paragraphs pointed out hereinabove. The
BALCO judgment (supra), when read as a whole, applies the
concept of “seat” as laid down by the English judgments (and
which is in Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1996), by
harmoniously construing Section 20 with Section 2(1)(e), so as to
broaden the definition of “court”, and bring within its ken courts
of the “seat” of the arbitration.
41. However, this proposition is contradicted when paragraph 96
speaks of the concurrent jurisdiction of Courts within whose
jurisdiction the cause of action arises wholly or in part, and Courts
within the jurisdiction of which the dispute resolution i.e.
arbitration, is located.
42. Paragraph 96 is in several parts. First and foremost, Section
2(1)(e), which is the definition of “Court” under the Arbitration
Act, 1996 was referred to, and was construed keeping in view the
provisions in Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, 1996, which give
recognition to party autonomy in choosing the seat of the
arbitration proceedings. Secondly, the Court went on to state in
two places in the said paragraph that jurisdiction is given to two
sets of Courts, namely, those Courts which would have jurisdiction
where the cause of action is located; and those Courts where the
arbitration takes place. However, when it came to providing a
neutral place as the “seat” of arbitration proceedings, the
example given by the Five Judge Bench made it clear that
appeals under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 against
interim orders passed under Section 17 of the Arbitration Act,
1996 would lie only to the Courts of the seat - which is Delhi in
that example - which are the Courts having supervisory control, or
jurisdiction, over the arbitration proceedings. The example then
goes on to state that this would be irrespective of the fact that the
obligations to be performed under the contract, that is the cause of
that the arbitration is to take place in Delhi is of importance.
However, the next sentence in the said paragraph reiterates the
concurrent jurisdiction of both Courts.
***
47. It was not until this Court’s judgment in Indus Mobile
Distribution Private Limited (supra) that the provisions of Section
20 were properly analysed in the light of the 246th Report of the
Law Commission of India titled, ‘Amendments to the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996’ (August, 2014) (hereinafter referred to
as the “Law Commission Report, 2014”), under which Section
20(1) and (2) would refer to the “seat” of the arbitration, and
Section 20(3) would refer only to the “venue” of the arbitration.
Given the fact that when parties, either by agreement or, in
default of there being an agreement, where the arbitral tribunal
determines a particular place as the seat of the arbitration under
Section 31(4) of the Arbitration Act, 1996, it becomes clear that
the parties having chosen the seat, or the arbitral tribunal having
determined the seat, have also chosen the Courts at the seat for
the purpose of interim orders and challenges to the award.
***
55. In Indus Mobile Distribution Private Limited and Ors.
(supra), after clearing the air on the meaning of Section 20 of the
Arbitration Act, 1996, the Court in paragraph 19 (which has
already been set out hereinabove) made it clear that the moment
a seat is designated by agreement between the parties, it is akin to
an exclusive jurisdiction clause, which would then vest the
Courts at the “seat” with exclusive jurisdiction for purposes of
regulating arbitral proceedings arising out of the agreement
between the parties.
***
61. Equally incorrect is the finding in Antrix Corporation Ltd.
(supra) that Section 42 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 would be
rendered ineffective and useless. Section 42 is meant to avoid
conflicts in jurisdiction of Courts by placing the supervisory
jurisdiction over all arbitral proceedings in connection with the
arbitration in one Court exclusively. This is why the section begins
with a non-obstante clause, and then goes on to state “...where
with respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this
Part has been made in a Court...” It is obvious that the application
made under this part to a Court must be a Court which has
of this Court, that where a seat is designated in an agreement, the
Courts of the seat alone have jurisdiction, would require that all
applications under Part I be made only in the Court where the
seat is located, and that Court alone then has jurisdiction over
the arbitral proceedings and all subsequent applications arising
out of the arbitral agreement. So read, Section 42 is not rendered
ineffective or useless. Also, where it is found on the facts of a
particular case that either no “seat” is designated by agreement,
or the so called “seat” is only a convenient “venue”, then there
may be several Courts where a part of the cause of action arises
that may have juris- 70 diction. Again, an application under
Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 may be preferred before a
court in which part of the cause of action arises in a case where
parties have not agreed on the “seat” of arbitration, and before
such “seat” may have been determined, on the facts of a particular
case, by the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 20(2) of the
Arbitration Act, 1996. In both these situations, the earliest
application having been made to a Court in which a part of the
cause of action arises would then be the exclusive Court under
Section 42, which would have control over the arbitral
proceedings. For all these reasons, the law stated by the Bombay
and Delhi High Courts in this regard is incorrect and is overruled.
123. There is another aspect of the matter, in as much as it is
undisputed that the Supply Contract and the MSA were executed prior
to the decision in BALCO (supra). Ordinarily, such agreements would
fall under the BHATIA regime. However, the Apex Court in
RELIANCE II (supra) clarified that Part I of the Act would stand
excluded by necessary implication where the seat of arbitration is
outside India or where the arbitration agreement is governed by
foreign law. The relevant observation made in RELIANCE II case
(supra) reads as follows:
“21. The last paragraph of Balco judgment has now to be read
with two caveats, both emanating from para 32 of Bhatia
International itself - that where the Court comes to a determination
that the juridical seat is outside India or where law other than
Indian law governs the arbitration agreement, Part I of the
Arbitration Act, 1996 would be excluded by necessary implication.
Therefore, even in the cases governed by the Bhatia principle, it is
arbitration is in India or on whose facts a judgment cannot be
reached on the seat of the arbitration as being outside India that
would continue to be governed by the Bhatia principle. Also, it is
only those agreements which stipulate or can be read to stipulate
that the law governing the arbitration agreement is Indian law
which would continue to be governed by the Bhatia rule.”
124. This position was reaffirmed in Arif Azim (supra) wherein it
was held that even for pre-BALCO agreements, Part-I would be
inapplicable if the juridical seat of arbitration is outside India.
125. Therefore, the agreement despite being executed prior to
BALCO (supra), Part-I of the Act stands excluded in the present case
by virtue of the express designation of London as the seat.
MAINTENANCE SERVICE AGREEMENT(MSA)
126. Clause 14 of the Maintenance Service Agreement (“MSA”)
governs dispute resolution and is largely pari materia with the
arbitration framework in the Supply Contract. Both agreements were
executed on the same day, and form part of a composite commercial
transaction. Significantly, the learned Singh Judge in CS(OS) No.
1678/2014, by judgment dated 14.08.2014, while considering a
challenge to the arbitration agreement, expressly observed that the
MSA was executed in furtherance of the Supply Contract. This
judicial finding lends substantial weight to the conclusion that the two
agreements must be construed harmoniously and conjointly, rather
than in isolation.
place” in London. While the term “seat” is not expressly used, as has
been mentioned in the Supply Contract, the use of the mandatory
phrase “shall take place” is of considerable significance. It indicates a
definitive and exclusive choice of London as the juridical seat of the
arbitration. Clause 14.6 further provides that the contract shall be
governed by Indian law, thereby designating the lex contractus.
128. However, it is now well settled under Indian law that the
governing law of the contract does not ipso facto determine the lex
arbitri or the supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings.
The distinction between lex contractus, lex arbitri, and lex fori has
been consistently recognized by the Apex Court, and parties are free
by virtue of party autonomy to choose different laws governing these
aspects of their arbitration of their agreement.
129. The clause of decisive and overriding importance in the MSA is
Clause 14.4. This clause does not find mention in the Supply Contract,
nevertheless, its presence in the MSA is unambiguous and categorical.
Critically, Clause 14.4 of the MSA expressly excludes the
applicability of Part-I of the Act. This Clause assumes paramount
significance and removes any residual ambiguity regarding the
parties’ intention. The clause reads as:
” 14.4 The parties expressly exclude the application of Part 1 of the
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996”.
130. Even assuming the applicability of BHATIA (supra), the parties
have both expressly and impliedly excluded Part I through Clause
thereby satisfying even the most stringent tests laid down in pre-
BALCO jurisprudence. The choice of London as the place of
arbitration, adoption of ICC Rules, and express exclusion of Part I,
collectively constitute a clear and determinative indication of parties’
intent to have arbitration at London.
131. The Apex Court has, in a plethora of decisions has consistently
emphasized “party autonomy” as the cornerstone of arbitration.
Parties have liberty to determine the seat of arbitration, the procedural
law governing the arbitration, and the substantive law governing the
contract. Accordingly, the conscious choice of the parties must be
respected, particularly in the context of international commercial
arbitration. In the present case, several positive indicia unequivocally
demonstrate the intention of the parties to exclude the application of
Part I of the Act, namely, (i) selection of London as the place where
arbitration “shall take place”, (ii) conduct of arbitration in accordance
with the ICC rules, with the procedural framework linked to ICC
Paris, (iii) absence of any alternative or concurrent venue or seat, and
most importantly, (iv) the express exclusion of Part I under clause
14.4 of the MSA. When these factors are read cumulatively, they form
an unbreakable chain of coherent and unmistakable expression of the
parties’ intention that the arbitration be seated outside India and be
governed by a foreign curial law, notwithstanding Indian law
governing the substantive contract.
132. The Apex Court in BALCO (supra) recognized party autonomy
This principal has since been reaffirmed and expanded in subsequent
decisions, including PASL (supra) which held that even two Indian
parties are free to designate and are entitled to choose a foreign seat of
arbitration. Arbitration jurisprudence in India thus celebrates Party
autonomy as the very foundation of arbitration, particularly in context
of international commercial arbitration. Court must interpret
arbitration agreement in the manner that gives effect to the
commercial intent and conscious choices of the contracting parties,
rather than frustrating them through hyper-technical or artificial
distinctions between “seat” and “place".
133. In light of the foregoing analysis, we conclude that the parties
have made a deliberate choice in selecting London as the “place” of
arbitration, invoking the procedural rules of ICC and by incorporating
Clause 14.4 of the MSA. These decisions clearly reflect the conscious
choice of the parties to exclude Part I of the Act and no contrary
indicia or evidence has been presented to suggest a different
interpretation. As such reading or interpreting the agreement in a
manner that applies Part I of the Act, or diverges from the express
terms, would be contrary to the legislative intent behind the Act,
which seeks to promote arbitration as a speedy and efficient dispute
resolution mechanism while respecting the autonomy of the parties
involved. This position stands fortified by the observations in PASL
(supra).
134. In this regard, we deem it relevant to refer to the observation
various earlier precedents and the available literature on the said
aspect, concluded in the following words:
42. Be that as it may, the legal position as we understand it is that
the parties to an arbitration agreement have the autonomy to
decide not only on the procedural law to be followed but also the
substantive law. The choice of jurisdiction is left to the contracting
parties. In the present case, the parties have agreed on a two-tier
arbitration system through Clause 14 of the agreement and Clause
16 of the agreement provides for the construction of the contract as
a contract made in accordance with the laws of India. We see
nothing wrong in either of the two clauses mutually agreed upon by
the parties.”
135. Further, we reiterate that a conjoint reading of the arbitration
clauses in both the Supply Contract and the MSA demonstrate that
London is designated as the venue of arbitration, and the arbitral
proceedings are to be conducted in accordance with ICC Rules Paris.
No other place is specified either as the venue or as the seat of
arbitration. Significantly, Clause 14.4 of the MSA expressly excludes
the applicability of Part I of the Act. The contractual framework,
therefore, leaves no ambiguity as to the intention of the parties.
136. Applying the ratio laid down in Arif Azim (supra), and in view
of Section 2(2) of the Act, this Court is unable to accept the contention
that Indian courts could exercise supervisory jurisdiction over the
arbitral proceedings.
137. On a plain, natural and harmonious construction of the dispute
resolution clauses, read in harmony with the other provisions of the
contracts, this Court finds no indication, express or implied, that the
distinct, were executed on the same date, relate to the same
commercial project, and are intrinsically interlinked in their
performance. Consequently, they must be read as a composite whole.
This approach is also consistent with the principle laid down by the
Apex Court in Olympus Superstructures (P) Ltd. v. Meena Vijay
Khetan30. The relevant observation reads as follows:
“30.If there is a situation where there are disputes and differences
in connection with the main agreement and also disputes in regard
to “other matters” “connected” with the subject matter of the main
agreement then in such a situation, in our view, we are governed
by the general arbitration clause 39 of the main agreement under
which disputes under the main agreement and disputes connected
therewith can be referred to the same arbitral tribunal. This clause
39 no doubt does not refer to any named arbitrators. So far as
clause 5 of the Interior Design Agreement is concerned, it refers to
disputes and differences arising from that agreement which can be
referred to named arbitrators and the said clause 5, in our opinion,
comes into play only in a situation where there are no disputes and
differences in relation to the main agreement and the disputes and
differences are solely confined to the Interior Design Agreement.
That, in our view, is the true intention of the parties and that is the
only way by which the general arbitration provision in clause 39 of
the main agreement and the arbitration provision for a named
arbitrator contained in clause 5 of the Interior Design Agreement
can be harmonised or reconciled. Therefore, in a case like the
present where the disputes and differences cover the main
agreement as well as the Interior Design Agreement, (that there
are disputes arising under the main agreement and the Interior
Design Agreement is not in dispute) – it is the general arbitration
clause 39 in the main agreement that governs because the
questions arise also in regard to disputes relating to the
overlapping items in the schedule to the main agreement and the
Interior Design Agreement, as detailed earlier. There cannot be
conflicting awards in regard to items which overlap in the two
agreements. Such a situation was never contemplated by the
parties. The intention of the parties when they incorporated clause
39 in the main agreement and clause 5 in the Interior Design
Agreement was that the former clause was to apply to situations
when there were disputes arising under both agreements and the
latter was to apply to a situation where there were no disputes or
differences arising under the main contract but the disputes and
differences were confined only to the Interior Design Agreement. A
case containing two agreements with arbitration clauses arose
before this Court in Agarwal Engg. Co. v. Technoimpex Hungarian
Machine Industries Foreign Trade Co. There were arbitration
clauses in two contracts, one for sale of two machines to the
appellant and the other appointing the appellant as sales
representative. On the facts of the case, it was held that both the
clauses operated separately and this conclusion was based on the
specific clause in the sale contract that it was the “sole repository”
of the sale transaction of the two machines. Krishna Iyer, J. held
that if that were so, then there was no jurisdiction for travelling
beyond the sale contract. The language of the other agreement
appointing the appellant as sales representative was prospective
and related to a sales agency and “later purchases”, other than the
purchases of these two machines. There was therefore no
overlapping. The case before us and the above case exemplify
contrary situations. In one case the disputes are connected and in
the other they are distinct and not connected. Thus, in the present
case, clause 39 of the main agreement applies. Points 1 and 2 are
decided accordingly in favour of the respondents.”
138. In this backdrop, this Court finds no infirmity in the conclusion
of the learned Single Judge that the petition under Section 34 of the
Act was not maintainable for want of jurisdiction.
139. The reliance placed by the learned Single Judge on Roger
Shoshuoa (supra) to elucidate the distinction between “venue” and
“seat” is also well founded. While the determination of the juridical
seat depends upon the facts of the case, the present case admits of no
ambiguity. The Supply Contract explicitly stipulates London as the
seat of arbitration, and Clause 14.4 of the MSA expressly excludes
Part I of the Act. The subsequent reliance on RELIANCE II (supra),
was therefore, apposite, and the conclusion that the juridical seat of
140. In the backdrop of the above analysis, we shall now proceed to
consider the submissions advanced by both the parties.
141. The submission advanced on behalf of the appellant that the
Respondent, by filing a petition under Section 9 of the Act before this
Court, had accepted the applicability of Part I and thereby attracted
Section 42 of the Act, is devoid of merit. We find that jurisdiction
cannot be conferred by consent, acquiescence, or conduct. In our
view, Section 42 is attracted only when the initial application is filed
before a court having jurisdiction in law. This position has been
authoritatively settled in BGS SGS Soma (supra), wherein it was held
that supervisory jurisdiction vests exclusively in the courts of the seat
of arbitration.
142. The observation made by the Apex Court in BGS SGS Soma
(supra) reads as follows:
“61. Equally incorrect is the finding in Antrix Corporation Ltd.
(supra) that Section 42 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 would be
rendered ineffective and useless. Section 42 is meant to avoid
conflicts in jurisdiction of Courts by placing the supervisory
jurisdiction over all arbitral proceedings in connection with the
arbitration in one Court exclusively. This is why the section begins
with a non-obstante clause, and then goes on to state “...where
with respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this
Part has been made in a Court...” It is obvious that the
application made under this part to a Court must be a Court
which has jurisdiction to decide such application. The subsequent
holdings of this Court, that where a seat is designated in an
agreement, the Courts of the seat alone have jurisdiction, would
require that all applications under Part I be made only in the
Court where the seat is located, and that Court alone then has
jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all subsequent
applications arising out of the arbitral agreement. So read,
Section 42 is not rendered ineffective or useless. Also, where it is
designated by agreement, or the so called “seat” is only a
convenient “venue”, then there may be several Courts where a
part of the cause of action arises that may have juris- 70 diction.
Again, an application under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, 1996
may be preferred before a court in which part of the cause of
action arises in a case where parties have not agreed on the “seat”
of arbitration, and before such “seat” may have been determined,
on the facts of a particular case, by the Arbitral Tribunal under
Section 20(2) of the Arbitration Act, 1996. In both these situations,
the earliest application having been made to a Court in which a
part of the cause of action arises would then be the exclusive Court
under Section 42, which would have control over the arbitral
proceedings. For all these reasons, the law stated by the Bombay
and Delhi High Courts in this regard is incorrect and is
overruled”.
143. That being said, the learned counsel for the appellant further
argued that since the arbitration agreement in the Supply Contract was
governed by Indian Law, Part I of the Act would apply regardless of
the seat. Reliance placed on Disortho (supra), Enercon(supra) and
braes of doune wind farm (Scotland) limited vs Alfred Mcalpine
business services limited(supra).
144. We are unable to accept this contention. As clarified in Arif
Azim (supra), the juridical seat playsa decisive role in determining the
supervisory jurisdiction. In Disortho (supra), the seat was not
expressly specified, and Part I was held applicable only after
interpreting the clauses as a whole. In the present case, however, the
Supply Contract expressly designates London as the seat, and Clause
14.4 of the MSA categorically excludes Part I. Therefore, reliance in
Disortho (supra) is misplaced. As, in the present case, the seat of
arbitration is expressly stipulated, and the exclusion of Part I is
145. It was also argued that Clause 26.6 of the MSA excludes
implied terms, and therefore, the learned Single Judge erred in
implying exclusion of Part I. We find this submission untenable.
Clause 14.4 excludes Part I, and any interpretation suggesting its
inclusion would render Clause 14.4 obsolete and defeat the clear
contractual intent. In the light of the above analysis, the learned Single
Judge’s decision to hold that Part I of the Act is inapplicable to this
case is sound and supported by the intention of the parties as reflected
in the clear language of the contracts. The choice of London as the
seat of arbitration in the “supply contract”, coupled with the exclusion
of Part I of the Act in the “MSA Contract”, indicates a clear intent to
subject the arbitration to international standards and exclude Indian
courts from having jurisdiction over the matter. The, Appellant’s
reliance on Section 9 petition and Section 42 is misplaced, as these
provisions only apply when Indian courts have jurisdiction in the first
place. The case law cited by the Appellant, such as Disortho (supra)
and Enercon (supra), is distinguishable, as those involved different
facts, where the seat of arbitration was not explicitly specified. The
contracts in this case clearly designate London as the seat of
arbitration, and the intention of the parties must be respected.
146. It is a settled principle of contractual interpretation that the
court must ascertain and give effect to the intention of the parties as
expressed in the contract. The language of the contract must be
construed in its natural and ordinary meaning. Where different clauses
appear to be inconsistent, the court must adopt an interpretation that
existence. The contract documents must be read harmoniously and
conjointly, keeping in view the “party autonomy” and the consistent
intention of the parties to get resolved their issues through alternative
dispute resolution mechanism of arbitration.
147. In present case, we find that no implied exclusion of Part-I of
the Act can be specifically inferred from Clause 14.4. However, a
reading of the agreements that results in the inclusion of Part I would
clearly defeat the very purpose of Clause 14.4 and would breach the
“party autonomy”, as they have consciously agreed to not be governed
by part-I of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.
148. Additionally, as discussed above, the execution of the MSA is
intrinsically linked to completion of the Supply Contract, and the
effectiveness of the MSA can reasonably be said to be contingent
upon the fulfilment of obligations under the Supply Contract. Both
agreements were executed on the same day and were aimed at
achieving a single commercial objective, namely, the completion of
the Airport Express project connecting the airport to the city of New
Delhi. Therefore, both contracts must be read in harmony and as part
of a composite transaction.
149. Thus, upon careful consideration to facts of the present case, the
evolved legal position, and the clearly discernible intention of the
parties, we are unable to agree with the submissions advanced by the
150. Since, the seat of the arbitration is admittedly outside India, this
court lacks jurisdiction under section 2(2) of the Act and the learned
Single Judge was correct in holding that Part-I of the Act is not
applicable to the facts of the present case.
151. In light of the foregoing analysis, we conclude that the parties
have made a deliberate and informed choice in selecting London as
the “place” of arbitration, invoking the procedural rules of the
International Chamber of Commerce (ICC), and incorporating Clause
14.4 of the MSA. These decisions clearly reflect the intent of the
parties to exclude the provisions of Part I of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, (“Act”) and no contrary indicia or evidence
has been presented to suggest a different interpretation.
152. As per Indian law, particularly the principles enshrined in the
Act, the parties have the autonomy to define the framework within
which their dispute will be resolved. Section 2(1)(f) of the Act, which
governs the definition of “arbitration agreement”, and Section 9,
which governs interim relief, establish the significance of the parties’
agreement in shaping the arbitration procedure. The express choice of
London as the seat of arbitration, along with the inclusion of ICC
rules, underscores the parties’ intent to be governed by a neutral
international framework that excludes the mandatory application of
Part I of the Act.
153. Further, the concept of party autonomy plays a pivotal role in
(supra), Indian courts respect the autonomy of parties to choose the
seat and rules of arbitration, provided such choice is unambiguous.
The position established in BHATIA was that if the parties explicitly
select a foreign seat of arbitration, the provisions of Part I of the Act
would generally not apply, unless specifically agreed to by the parties.
This reflects India’s commitment to ensure that international
arbitration is governed by principles of party autonomy and minimal
judicial intervention.
154. In this context, it is clear that the inclusion of ICC rules and the
determination of London as the seat are not mere formalities but
fundamental aspects of the parties’ agreement, designed to ensure a
neutral, well established procedural framework. As such, reading or
interpreting the agreement in a manner that applies Part I of the Act,
or diverges from the express terms, would be contrary to the
legislative intent behind the Act, which seeks to promote arbitration as
a speedy and efficient dispute resolution mechanism while respecting
the autonomy of the parties involved.
155. Having regard to the totality of circumstances, the evolved
position of law, and the clear contractual intent, this Court finds no
error in the impugned judgment. Since the seat of arbitration is outside
India, the bar contained in Section 2(2) of the Act squarely applies and
the jurisdiction of Indian courts is excluded, rendering Part I of the
Act inapplicable. The dispute shall be governed by the arbitral
156. Accordingly, in view of the facts and circumstances of the case
and the legal position discussed hereinabove, we find no reason to
interfere with the impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge.
157. Consequently, the present appeal is, therefore, dismissed, along
with all pending applications, if any, and the order of the learned
Single Judge is upheld.
158. There shall be no order(s) as to cost.
OM PRAKASH SHUKLA, J
C.HARI SHANKAR, J
DECEMBER 24, 2025/pa/at