COURT: High Court of Delhi at New Delhi
CASE_TYPE: Arbitration
CASE_NO: ARB. A. (COMM.) 28/2025
DATE: 24th December, 2025
PLAINTIFF: Preeti Bhutani & Anr.
DEFENDENT: Goyal Publishers and Distributors Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
JUDGE: Hon'ble Ms. Justice Jyoti Singh

--------JUDGEMENT---------

1. This appeal is preferred on behalf of the Appellants challenging
Section 17 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (‘1996 Act’), whereby
learned Arbitrator declined to grant interim injunction to the Appellants
albeit Respondent No.1 was directed to maintain accounts of the sales with
respect to the impugned works i.e., Allez-y! 1, Allez-y! 2 and Allez-y! 3
(Allez-y series) for the period commencing from 20.03.2025. It was also
directed that accounts will be maintained book-wise and will be tendered
before the Arbitral Tribunal every quarter in a sealed cover with an affidavit
of Respondent No.1.
2. Case of Appellant No.1 is that she started her career as a French
language teacher in 2000 and in 2003 established an educational society
focusing on French language promotion in schools etc. In 2006, Appellant
No.1 started her career as an author and authored two French books titled
Les Exercices Français and All Essential French Verbs which were
published by Appellant No.2/Unisec Publication. Looking at the success
achieved by Appellant No.1, Respondent No.1 approached her for
collaboration in 2007 and at the end of the year, Petits Pas-1 and Petits Pas-
2 (Petits Pas series) authored by her were published, where Appellant No.1
was shown as the author. Appellant No.1 also authored French books
Flambeau and Mon Passeport, which were also published by Appellant
No.2.
3. It is averred that Petits Pas series were published under written
Agreements both dated 03.11.2008, executed between Appellant No.1 and
Respondent No.1, having identical terms. As per Clause 2 of the
Agreements, copyright in the manuscript was with the author and
Respondent No.1 was responsible for design, publication and distribution
between 2008 to 2025 and earned profits but no royalty was paid to
Appellant No.1. In November, 2024, Appellant No.1 learnt through market
sources about the launch of French books Allez-y series, published by
Respondents 1 and 2 and authored by Respondents 3 and 4. Respondent
No.5 is a former employee of Appellant No.2 and currently employed as
Marketing Manager with Respondent No.1. After comparison of the books,
Appellant No.1 found that the books in the Allez-y series were substantial
copies of books authored by her under the Petits Pas series and Flambeau
and Mon Passeport and infringed the copyright of Appellant No.1 in the said
books.
4. Appellants aver that realising that Respondent No.1 was infringing the
copyright of Appellant No.1 to cover up its illegal action, it filed a suit being
CS DJ No. 4290/2024 before District Court, Saket alleging that Appellant
No.1 was maligning and defaming the Respondents and adversely
commenting on their books in public and obtained an ex-parte injunction.
Appellants filed CS (COMM) 31/2025 against the Respondents in District
Court, Patiala House on 13.01.2025 inter alia seeking interim injunction
against infringement, in which Respondent No.1 filed an application under
Section 8 of 1996 Act invoking Arbitration Clause 12 in the Agreements
dated 03.11.2008, which was allowed vide order dated 11.03.2025 and
parties were referred for adjudication of their disputes through arbitration.
5. To complete the factual narrative, on 17.03.2025 Appellant No.1 filed
a petition under Section 9 of 1996 Act being O.M.P (I) 90/2025 for urgent
reliefs, which was disposed of on 20.03.2025 appointing a Sole Arbitrator
and directing that Section 9 petition be treated as an application under
declined to grant interim injunction on the sole ground that Appellant No.1
had not claimed royalty since 2008. According to the Arbitrator albeit there
was copyright infringement but two of the three parameters for grant of
injunction i.e. balance of convenience and irreparable loss or injury were
not satisfied.
6. Ms. Rajeshwari appearing on behalf of the Appellants contended that
Appellant No.1 is a pioneer of French language teaching and education in
India and has authored over 50 French books. In 2007, Respondent No.1
which is a publication and distribution house of educational books,
approached her to collaborate in its next project for publishing French
textbooks as Respondents No.1 and 2 had no prior experience in publication
of French books. Collaboration Agreements were executed on 03.11.2008
under which Appellant No.1 was the author of the comprehensive series of
French language books for school education and was to remain as an author
while publication and distribution rights were given to Respondent No.1. It
was also agreed that Respondent No.1 shall have no right to publish the
books through any other author. Appellant No.1 worked long hours to
ensure that the books were completed early and also often visited the office
of Respondent No.1 and closely worked with its designer. With her efforts,
the manuscripts of the books were completed in time and handed over to
Respondent No.1 in a CD and later the Petits Pas series were published as
Textbooks and Workbooks.
7. It was contended that the Agreements clearly evidence that Appellant
No.1 was the ‘Author’ as defined under Section 2(d) of Copyright Act, 1957
(‘1957 Act’). Section 2(y) defines “Work” to include literary work and each
Appellant No.1 is thus entitled to protect the copyright vested in her under
Section 55(2) of the 1957 Act. Reliance was placed on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in R.G. Anand v. Deluxe Films and Others, (1978) 4 SCC
118, wherein the Supreme Court held that copyright is confined to form,
manner and arrangement and expression of the idea by the author of the
copyrighted work.
8. In the book publishing industry, it is an accepted practice that once an
author submits a manuscript, editor can carry out changes but he does not
become the author. Stand of the Respondents that the books were authored
by Ms. Farida Irani is totally false and belied by the fact that when the first
edition was published in 2008, Appellant No.1 was shown as the author and
it was acknowledged that the copyright vested in her. Even the Foreword of
the said books was by an eminent person acknowledging her as the author
and name of Ms. Farida Irani was shown as an editor. Receipt of
manuscripts from Appellant No.1 stands recorded in the Agreements and is
not denied even today. If the position that Respondents now adopt that the
manuscripts were not up to the mark and were discarded was correct, there
was no reason to show the name of Appellant No.1 as the author.
9. It was urged that learned Arbitrator rendered favourable prima facie
findings that Appellant No.1 was a copyright holder in the Petits Pas series
and Flambeau series and that there was copyright infringement, after
extensive comparison and analysis of the contents etc. of the rival books, yet
interim injunction was erroneously and illegally declined on the sole basis
that Appellant No.1 had never claimed royalty for the books in the Petits
Pas series since 2008. First and foremost, protection of a copyright cannot
and secondly, Arbitrator has inappropriately extended this reasoning to other
distinct works, namely, Flambeau and Mon Passeport, despite absence of
royalty related issues concerning these titles, overlooking that claim of
infringement encompassed these separate literary works also. Having
rendered a prima facie finding that impugned works including texts, theme,
sequence as also placement were a verbatim copy of the original works of
Appellant No.1 and there was copyright infringement, there was no
plausible reason or justification to deny the interim injunction restraining
Respondents from publishing, selling, distributing or offering for sale all
editions of series 1 to 4 of Allez-y. Reliance was placed on the judgment in
Re: IGNOU v. Dominant Publishers and Distributors, 2019 SCC OnLine
Del 8655, to argue that even copying of small extract of original work
constitutes infringement.
10. Learned Senior Counsel for Respondents No.1 and 2 opposed the
appeal and defending the impugned order argued that no interim relief was
granted to the Appellants by this Court when Section 9 petition was filed
and from the date of filing the petition till the date of the impugned order,
there was no change in the circumstances, entitling the Appellants to interim
injunction. Till date, Appellant No.1 has not provided the manuscripts and
given no explanation for their non-production and the reason is that the
manuscripts and the books published by Respondent No.1 are substantially
different. Under Section 105 of Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, the
onus of proof is on a person who would fail if no evidence at all were given
on either side and in the present case, Appellant No.1 has failed to discharge
the onus.
to each other and had cordial relationship. Though Petits Pas series was
styled as a joint project between Respondent No.1 and Appellant No. 2, the
latter did not contribute a single penny to publish the books. Much was
emphasised by Appellant No.1 that her name was shown on the book as an
author, however, this was done by the Respondents only as a gesture of
goodwill. Albeit Appellant No.1 spent time in the office of Respondent No.1
writing the manuscripts, however, the same were discarded as the quality
was poor and far below expected and/or promised writing. Finally, the book
was authored by Ms. Farida Irani.
12. It was further argued that Respondent No.1 is a registered company,
which was started in 1987 by a second generation entrepreneur and is one of
the leading importers, distributors and publishers of international books in
India, especially in the field of education. Appellants had suppressed critical
facts before the Arbitrator that Ms. Farida Irani had extensively re-written
and reconstructed the final published work from the manuscript of Appellant
No.1 and therefore, by no imagination, Appellant No.1 can be called as
author of the work to claim copyright therein and she never ever worked on
the book titled Le Nouveau Petits Pas III. One time royalty payment was
made to Appellant No.1 initially which she accepted without demur and for
long 17 years, there was no claim for royalty and this was for the reason that
Appellant No.1 knew that Respondent No.1 had terminated the Agreements.
It is inconceivable that an author would not claim royalty from 2008 to 2025
and therefore, the Arbitrator rightly declined injunction on this ground.
13. It was further argued that Appellants’ reliance on Section 55(2) of
1957 Act to claim a presumption of authorship is grossly misplaced. This
whose name appears on the published work as an author. In the present case,
Respondents have produced substantial documentary evidence and editorial
records showing that original manuscript was extensively altered and this
presumption can only be adjudicated after complete evidence is led before
the Arbitrator.
14. It was contended that there has to be a modicum of creativity. In the
present case, the illustrations were provided by M/s. Reliable Info Media
and there is nothing on record to show that Appellant No.1 dictated to the
said firm the sequence of images and in any case, this would be seen only
when manuscripts are made available. Emphasis by Appellant No.1 on
Clause 1 of the Agreements to show that author had delivered manuscripts
of books, is of no aid since Agreements are only paper agreements and not
commercial arrangements. The arbitration proceedings initiated by
Appellants is only a counterblast to the suit filed by Respondent No.1
against them for defamation and damages. Reliance was placed on the
judgment in R.G. Anand (supra) to contend that there is no copyright in an
idea or theme and violation of copyright in such cases is confined to form,
manner and arrangement and expression of idea by the author of the
copyrighted work. Where same idea is developed in different manner, it is
manifest that source being common, similarities are bound to occur.
15. It was urged that the learned Arbitrator has passed a detailed order
deliberating on each and every issue and after finding that no case for
injunction was made out as Appellants failed to establish that balance of
convenience was in favour of the Appellants and irreparable injury will be
caused if injunction was not granted. Grant of injunction is governed by the
grant of injunction. It was also argued that the scope of interference under
Section 37(2) of 1996 Act is extremely limited and no interference is
warranted unless the Arbitrator’s view is manifestly perverse or suffers from
jurisdictional error or miscarriage of justice. It is not for this Court to
substitute its view for the view of the Arbitrator taken under Section 17 of
1996 Act. In support of this plea, reliance was placed on the judgments in
Dinesh Gupta and Others v. Anand Gupta and Others, 2020 SCC OnLine
Del 2099; Tahal Consulting Engineers India Pvt. Ltd. v. Promax Power
Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine Del 2069; Manish Aggarwal and Another v. RCI
Industries and Technologies Limited, 2022 SCC OnLine Del 1285; Sanjay
Arora and Another v. Rajan Chadha and Others, 2021 SCC OnLine Del
4619; and Green Infra Wind Energy Limited v. Regen Powertech Private
Limited, 2018 SCC OnLine Del 8273.
16. Learned counsel for Respondents No.3 and 4 argued that the
allegations against the said Respondents are wholly misconceived and
denied. Said Respondents have been authors in the field for 25 years and
during the course of arbitral proceedings will be in a position to demonstrate
dissimilarities in the rival works Appellant No.1 has taken no action to even
claim royalty since 2008 and Arbitrator has rightly held that no irreparable
loss will be caused if injunction was not granted. In case this Court grants
injunction, irreparable loss will be caused to Respondents No.3 and 4 who
are teachers and authors of formidable repute.
17. Heard learned counsels for the Appellants and Respondents No.3 and
4 and learned Senior Counsel for Respondents No.1 and 2.
18. There can be no dispute to the legal proposition that scope of judicial
refer to the judgment of this Court in Green Infra Wind (supra), relevant
passages from which are as follows:-
“16. In my view, the Arbitral Tribunal has balanced the equity between the
parties and has considered the submissions made by the parties before the
Arbitral Tribunal. This Court in exercise of its power under Section 37 of
the Act cannot interfere with the order passed by the Arbitral Tribunal
under Section 17 of the Act unless the discretion exercised by the
Tribunal is found to be perverse or contrary to law. As an Appellate
Court, the interference is not warranted merely because the Appellate
Court in exercise of its discretion would have exercised the same
otherwise.
17. In Wander Ltd. v. Antox India P. Ltd., 1990 Supp SCC 727, the
Supreme Court while dealing with the power of the Appellate Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 has held as under:
“13. On a consideration of the matter, we are afraid, the Appellate
Bench fell into error on two important propositions. The first is a
misdirection in regard to the very scope and nature of the appeals
before it and the limitations on the powers of the Appellate Court to
substitute its own discretion in an appeal preferred against a
discretionary order. The second pertains to the infirmities in the
ratiocinations as to the quality of Antox's alleged user of the trade-
mark on which the passing-off action is founded. We shall deal with
these two separately.
14. The appeals before the Division Bench were against the exercise
of discretion by the Single Judge. In such appeals, the Appellate Court
will not interfere with the exercise of discretion of the court of first
instance and substitute its own discretion except where the discretion
has been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously or
perversely or where the court had ignored the settled principles of law
regulating grant or refusal of interlocutory injunctions. An appeal
against exercise of discretion is said to be an appeal on principle.
Appellate Court will not reassess the material and seek to reach a
conclusion different from the one reached by the court below if the
one reached by that court was reasonably possible on the material.
The appellate court would normally not be justified in interfering with
the exercise of discretion under appeal solely on the ground that if it
had considered the matter at the trial stage it would have come to a
contrary conclusion. If the discretion has been exercised by the Trial
Court reasonably and in a judicial manner the fact that the appellate
court would have taken a different view may not justify interference
with the trial court's exercise of discretion. After referring to these
principles Gajendragadkar, J. in Printers (Mysore) Private
“... These principles are well established, but as has been observed
by Viscount Simon in Charles Osention & Co. v. Jhanaton ...the
law as to the reversal by a court of appeal of an order made by a
judge below in the exercise of his discretion is well established, and
any difficulty that arises is due only to the application of well
settled principles in an individual case.”
The appellate judgment does not seem to defer to this principle.”
18. Recently in Ascot Hotels and Resorts Pvt. Ltd. v. Connaught Plaza
Restaurants Pvt. Ltd., Arb.A.(Comm) 12/2017, this Court again reiterated
the above mentioned principle.
19. This Court in Bakshi Speedways v. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation,
2009 SCC OnLine Del 2476, has held that the same principles will apply
even in case of an appeal under Section 37(2)(b) of the Act. Paragraph 4
of the said judgment is quoted herein below:
“4. The principles applicable to an appeal under Section 37(2)(b) in
my view ought to be the same as the principles in an appeal against an
order under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2, CPC i.e., unless the discretion
exercised by the Court against whose order the appeal is preferred is
found to have been exercised perversely and contrary to law, the
appellate Court ought not to interfere with the order merely because
the appellate court in the exercise of its discretion would have
exercised so otherwise. I had at the beginning of the hearing itself
inquired from the senior counsel for the appellant as to what could be
said to be perverse in the exercise of discretion by the Arbitral
Tribunal in the exercise of powers under Section 17 of the Act
and as to how the said interim measures granted by the Arbitral
Tribunal could be said to be contrary to law; it was further pointed
out that in the opinion of this court, on the perusal of the
memorandum of appeal, the only ground which appeared to have
some force was the ground taken in the memorandum of appeal of the
arbitrator as on the date of making of the order having become
functus officio.”
20. In view of the above, the Arbitral Tribunal having exercised its
discretion and found a balance of equity between the parties, this Court in
exercise of its power under Section 37(2)(b) of the Act would not interfere
with the same unless it is shown that the discretion so exercised is perverse
in any manner or contrary to the law. In the present case, no such
exception has been made out by the appellant.”
19. I may also allude to the judgment in World Window Infrastructure
Private Limited v. Central Warehousing Corporation, 2021 SCC OnLine
“Analysis
66. The scope of interference, in appeal, against orders passed by
arbitrators on applications under Section 17 of the 1996 Act is limited.
This Court has already opined in Dinesh Gupta v. Anand Gupta [Dinesh
Gupta v. Anand Gupta, 2020 SCC OnLine Del 2099] , Augmont Gold (P)
Ltd. v. One97 Communication Ltd. [Augmont Gold (P) Ltd. v. One97
Communication Ltd., (2021) 4 HCC (Del) 642] and Sanjay Arora v. Rajan
Chadha [Sanjay Arora v. Rajan Chadha, (2021) 3 HCC (Del) 654] that
the restraints which apply on the court while examining a challenge to a
final award under Section 34 equally apply to a challenge to an
interlocutory order under Section 37(ii)(b). In either case, the court has to
be alive to the fact that, by its very nature, the 1996 Act frowns upon
interference, by courts, with the arbitral process or decisions taken by the
arbitrator. This restraint, if anything, operates more strictly at an
interlocutory stage than at the final stage, as interference with
interlocutory orders could interference with the arbitral process while it is
ongoing, which may frustrate, or impede, the arbitral proceedings.
67. Views expressed by arbitrators while deciding applications under
Section 17 are interlocutory views. They are not final expressions of
opinion on the merits of the case between the parties. They are always
subject to modification or review at the stage of final award. They do not,
therefore, in most cases, irreparably prejudice either party to the
arbitration. Section 17 like Section 9 is intended to be a protective
measure, to preserve the sanctity of the arbitral process. The pre-eminent
consideration, which should weigh with the arbitrator while examining a
Section 17 application, is the necessity to preserve the arbitral process and
ensure that the parties before it are placed on an equitable scale. The
interlocutory nature of the order passed under Section 17, therefore, must
necessarily inform the court seized with an appeal against such a decision,
under Section 37. Additionally, the considerations which apply to Section
34 would also apply to Section 37(ii)(b)."
20. It is thus clear that interference under Section 37(2)(b) of 1996 Act is
warranted only where the order of the Arbitral Tribunal suffers from
perversity or is arbitrary or contrary to law and/or where the Arbitral
Tribunal has either exceeded its jurisdiction or failed to exercise its
jurisdiction leading to miscarriage of justice and therefore, to this extent the
judgments relied upon by learned Senior Counsel for Respondents No.1 and
2 are entirely applicable as far as the proposition of law is concerned. It is
Act are akin to this Court under Section 9, except that in Section 9, the Court
has the power to direct interim measures before, during or after the
conclusion of the arbitral proceedings.
21. Keeping the scope of interference in an interim order passed by an
Arbitral Tribunal in the backdrop, I may now examine whether the
impugned order passed under Section 17 of 1996 Act is so perverse or
manifestly arbitrary, that it warrants interference by this Court. There can be
no debate that grant of interim injunction is governed by the trinity principle
i.e., prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable harm and
injury. In the present case, admittedly, Arbitrator has held in no uncertain
terms that there exists a prima facie case in favour of Appellant No.1.
Despite this finding, injunction was denied influenced by the fact that
Appellant No.1 did not claim royalty from 2008 till 2025. The main plank of
argument of Appellant No.1 is that once the Arbitrator himself found albeit
as a prima facie finding that copyright in Petits Pas series and Flambeau
and Mon Passeport vests in Appellant No.1 and there is infringement of the
copyright, interim injunction ought to have been granted to protect the right
dehors the fact that Appellant No.1 did not claim royalty, which in any
event, is a business decision of an author.
22. In order to determine whether interim injunction was rightly denied
by the learned Arbitrator, it will be useful and pertinent to refer to some
crucial findings and prima facie conclusions of the learned Arbitrator, which
are in favour of Appellant No.1. Arbitrator found that: (a) Appellant No.1
was shown as author of books in the Petits Pas series and Flambeau and
Mon Passeport and thus statutory presumption under Section 55(2) of 1957
appears on the work when it was made, the said person shall be presumed to
be the author of the work, unless the contrary is proved, gets attracted;
(b) modicum of creativity is established when Respondent No.1
acknowledged in the Agreements that Appellant No.1 holds copyright in the
manuscript; (c) defence of Respondent No.1 that Appellant No.1’s name
was shown as a goodwill gesture is untenable as no reason was given to
show her name as an author in the first instance and to continue the same till
date and no communication or evidence was placed on record to show that
manuscripts authored by her were rejected and instead duly executed
Agreements acknowledge Appellant No.1 to be the author; (d) Ms. Farida
Irani was shown as an Editor and not an Author in the first edition of the
books and therefore, if manuscripts authored by Appellant No.1 were
rejected and had to be revised by Ms. Farida Irani, she should have been
shown as the Author; (e) Agreements, particularly Clauses 1 and 3 suggest
that the books were already published when the Agreements were signed
and Clause 1 is an acknowledgement of delivery of manuscripts of the books
while Clause 3 guaranteed that the books in question in no way infringed the
copyright and therefore, if the work was defective there was no need to sign
the Agreements after the publication thereof; (f) there was no proof of
termination of the Agreements by Respondents No.1 and 2 as alleged and
this plea is also negated by the averments in the application under Section 8
of 1996 Act filed by Respondent No.1 in the suit filed by Appellants;
(g) Respondent No.1 failed to produce manuscripts of Petits Pas series to
compare the original work of Appellant No.1 with the final published work
to demonstrate that they were different, more so, when Clause 1 of the
No.1 and therefore, the onus was on Respondent No.1 to produce the
manuscripts, which it failed to do; (h) perusal of partial manuscripts of Petits
Pas-I showed that the comments of the Editor related to graphics and their
placement and not the text authored by Appellant No.1; and (i) modicum of
creativity is established when Respondent No.1 acknowledges in the
Agreements that Appellant No.1 holds copyright in the manuscripts and
agrees to print her name on the cover page of the book as also not to include
the name of any other person as author without the consent of Appellant
No.1; and (j) defence of Respondents that there was no occasion for
Appellant No.1 to work on the manuscripts in the office of Respondent No.1
due to her pregnancy is not relevant inasmuch as how and where the
manuscripts were authored and books were given final shape prior to
publication pales into insignificance in view of the admitted position that
Appellant No.1 was shown as the author and likewise, the plea that if
Appellant No.1 worked on the computers of Respondent No.1 in its office
on her own showing, the stand of Appellant No.1 that manuscripts were
given in a CD was contradictory, is irrelevant when she is shown as the
author.
23. Having rendered these crucial findings, learned Arbitrator made a
comparison between Petits Pas-I, Petits Pas-II, Flambeau 1 and Flambeau 4
with impugned works, namely, Allez-y! 1, Allez-y! 2 and Allez-y! 3 and came
to a prima facie conclusion that there was verbatim copy of many portions
from the original work. It was observed that the pages showed identical text,
theme, sequence as also placement and it was no strange coincidence that
Respondents No. 3 and 4 had chosen the same nationalities, countries, time,
same conversation, same expressions with verb ‘jouer’ and same makes of
cars and that too in the same sequence as in the works of Appellant No.1.
The Arbitrator also scanned the comparative work as under as a part of the
order as follows :-
Comparison between Allez-y! 1 and Petits Pas 1
and
Comparison between Allez-y! 2 and Flambeau 4
24. Pertinently, Respondents have not assailed these findings. The
Arbitrator observed that the work of Appellant No.1 in her books is ‘original
literary work’ under Section 2(o) of 1957 Act and she has exclusive rights to
reproduce the same. Hence, copying of even a small extract of the original
work constitutes infringement. It was prima facie concluded that Appellant
No.1 is the author of the text in Petits Pas series and Flambeau series and
Respondents No.1 to 4 have reproduced her work in Allez-y series without
her consent. With these findings that Appellant No.1 is the author of the
works in her books and has copyright being the author in the same and that
grant injunction on the sole ground that Appellant No.1 had not claimed any
royalty since 2008 and had not shown any reason for not demanding the
same, thereby tilting the balance of convenience in favour of the
Respondents.
25. Having carefully perused the impugned order, I am of the view that
the same is demonstrably perverse and arbitrary. In Saurabh Gupta v.
Sheopals Pvt. Ltd., 2025 SCC OnLine Del 8579, the Division Bench of this
Court albeit in the case of trademark held that whenever a prima facie case
of infringement is made out, an injunction must follow. In the present case,
the findings on authorship and copyright infringement based on detailed
reasoning rendered by the Arbitrator justified grant of interim injunction in
favour of Appellant No.1 to protect her copyright. Significantly,
Respondents have not assailed the findings of the Arbitrator and therefore,
this Court need not detain itself on these issues. The fact that Appellant No.1
did not claim royalty from 2008 cannot have a bearing on the right of
Appellant No.1 to protect the copyright vested in her as an author of the
works, which have been prima facie blatantly copied to the hilt by the
Respondents. Claiming royalty was a business decision but that cannot take
away the right of an author to protect its copyright. Appellant No.1 is also
right in urging that the royalty issue did not concern Flambeau and Mon
Passeport, yet denial of injunction is all encompassing.
26. In light of the aforesaid, in my view, this is a fit case warranting
interference in the impugned order of the Arbitrator to the extent he declined
to grant interim injunction. Accordingly, order dated 07.05.2025 is set aside
to this extent and Respondents, their agents etc., are restrained from
of book series 1-4 of Allez-y, which amounts to infringement of copyright of
Appellant No.1 in the books authored by her in the Petits Pas series as also
in Flambeau and Mon Passeport.
27. Appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms along with pending
applications. It is made clear that the view expressed in this judgment is only
prima facie and will have no bearing on the final adjudication in the arbitral
proceedings.
JYOTI SINGH, J
DECEMBER 24 , 2025
S.Sharma